Draft version May 4, 2021
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

Transport of Protostellar Cosmic Rays in Turbulent Dense Cores
1

Margot Fitz Axen, Stella S. S. Offner,1, 2 Brandt A. L. Gaches,3, 2 Chris L. Fryer,4 Aimee Hungerford,4 and
Kedron Silsbee5
1 Department

of Astronomy, The University of Texas at Austin, 2515 Speedway, Stop C1400, Austin, Texas 78712-1205, USA.
of Planetary Systems Habitability, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX 78712, USA
3 I. Physikalisches Institut, Universität zu Köln, Zülpicher Strasse 77, 50937, Köln, Germany
4 Center for Theoretical Astrophysics, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87544, USA
5 Max-Planck-Institut für Extraterrestrische Physik, Giessenbachstrasse, 85748, Garching, Germany

arXiv:2105.00028v1 [astro-ph.GA] 30 Apr 2021

2 Center

(Received date; Revised date; Accepted May 4, 2021)

ABSTRACT
Recent studies have suggested that low-energy cosmic rays (CRs) may be accelerated inside molecular
clouds by the shocks associated with star formation. We use a Monte Carlo transport code to model
the propagation of CRs accelerated by protostellar accretion shocks through protostellar cores. We
calculate the CR attenuation and energy losses and compute the resulting flux and ionization rate as
a function of both radial distance from the protostar and angular position. We show that protostellar
cores have non-uniform CR fluxes that produce a broad range of CR ionization rates, with the maximum
value being up to two orders of magnitude higher then the radial average at a given distance. In
particular, the CR flux is focused in the direction of the outflow cavity, creating a 'flashlight' effect and
allowing CRs to leak out of the core. The radially averaged ionization rates are less than the measured
value for the Milky Way of ζ ≈ 10−16 s−1 ; however, within r ≈ 0.03 pc from the protostar, the maximum
ionization rates exceed this value. We show that variation in the protostellar parameters, particularly
in the accretion rate, may produce ionization rates that are a couple of orders of magnitude higher
or lower than our fiducial values. Finally, we use a statistical method to model unresolved sub-grid
magnetic turbulence in the core. We show that turbulence modifies the CR spectrum and increases
the uniformity of the CR distribution but does not significantly affect the resulting ionization rates.
1. INTRODUCTION
accretion, and the ability of the disk to form planetesimals (Dutrey et al. 2014).
Cosmic rays (CRs) are the primary drivers of ionThe level of cosmic ray ionization is usually exization inside the densest regions of molecular clouds
pressed
quantitatively as the Cosmic Ray Ionization
where UV radiation cannot penetrate (Dalgarno 2006;
Rate
(CRIR),
which is the rate of CR ionizations per
Padovani et al. 2020). The degree of ionization in starhydrogen
molecule.
The mean galactic ionization rate
forming regions is critical to setting the atomic and
−16 −1
is
ζ
≈
10
s
(Indriolo
& McCall 2012); however, obmolecular abundances (Wakelam et al. 2012). Ionizaservations
along
different
sightlines suggest higher rates
tion also impacts the gas dynamics inside the cloud, as
towards
the
Galactic
center
(Indriolo et al. 2015). CR
ionized species couple to the magnetic field and resist
ionizations
produce
molecules
such as OH+ , H2 O+ , and
collapse while neutral molecules decouple from the field
+
H3 O in diffuse interstellar clouds, so observations of
through ambipolar diffusion (Fiedler & Mouschovias
these molecules indicate the abundance of CRs and can
1993). Ionization is especially crucial to the evolution of
be used to derive the CRIR (Indriolo et al. 2015).
circumstellar disks, as the level of ionization determines
While high energy CRs (E > 100 GeV) are primarwhether the Magnetorotational Instability (MRI) is acily
accelerated to relativistic energies by supernovae and
tive (Balbus & Hawley 1991; Gammie 1996). The MRI
active
galactic nuclei (Morlino 2017; Berezhko 2008), reimpacts the dynamics of angular momentum transport,
cent studies suggest that the shocks associated with star
formation also have the right conditions to accelerate
Corresponding author: Margot Fitz Axen
CRs with lower energies of E < 100 GeV. For example,
fitza003@utexas.edu
observations of HCO+ and N2 H+ along sightlines to-

2

Fitz Axen et al.

wards the protostars OMC-2 FIR 4 and L1157-B1 indicate values higher than the mean CRIR (Ceccarelli et al.
2014; Fontani et al. 2017; Podio et al. 2014). Favre et al.
(2018) measured a value of ζ ≈ 10−14 s−1 towards OMC2 FIR 4, two orders of magnitude higher than the Milky
Way value. In general, differences in the ionization rate
in certain regions may be explained by the magnetic
field morphology in those regions. Measurements of the
magnetic fields in young protostellar systems have found
that they trace an hour-glass-like shape (Girart et al.
2006), though this is not necessarily ubiquitous. To leading order, this field geometry does not significantly impact the CR flux (Fatuzzo & Adams 2014); however, the
environments surrounding young stellar objects are expected to be turbulent. Theoretical studies have found
that in the presence of 'magnetic pockets' - regions with
a locally reduced magnetic field strength that naturally
occur in magnetized turbulence - the CRIR may be significantly lower (Fatuzzo & Adams 2014; Silsbee et al.
2018). Consequently the elevated observed ionization
rates suggest a local mechanism is acting to accelerate
CRs inside molecular clouds.
Another signature of CR acceleration is non-thermal
synchrotron emission, which is caused by relativistic
electrons gyrating around a magnetic field. Evidence of
non-thermal emission has been linked to shocks in protostellar jets (Anglada et al. 2018). Synchrotron emission has been observed from the HH 80-81 jet and a
jet in the star forming region G035.02+0.35, which are
both associated with young massive stars (Rodrı́guezKamenetzky et al. 2017; Sanna et al. 2019). Synchrotron
emission has also been detected from the jet of the lower
mass young sunlike star DG Tau (Ainsworth et al. 2014).
These results further support the evidence that the formation of young stars generates low-energy CRs.
Theoretical studies have modeled the acceleration of
CRs associated with protostellar shocks (Padovani et al.
2015, 2016). Padovani et al. (2016) developed a model
of protostellar CR proton and electron acceleration at
three potential sites; accretion flow shocks in collapsing envelopes, jet shocks, and surface accretion shocks.
Gaches & Offner (2018) extended the surface accretion
shock predictions to include more detailed models of
the shocks, focusing on connecting the properties of the
shock and the resulting CR spectrum to the properties
of the forming star. These authors also investigated the
attenuation of the CR spectrum in clouds, dense cores
and disks (Padovani et al. 2016, 2018; Gaches & Offner
2018; Offner et al. 2019). However, they used analytic
models that made simplifications assuming isotropic diffusion for the protostellar core properties.

Protostellar cores exhibit a number of asymmetries
that likely influence CR propagation. Both the magnetic
field and the density of the gas influence CR propagation; the magnetic field determines the direction of their
travel, and the gas density determines how much energy
they lose. Cores are often prolate and elongated along
the direction of filaments (Myers et al. 1991; Nutter
& Ward-Thompson 2007). Cores, particularly those in
higher mass star forming regions like Orion are also turbulent (Kirk et al. 2017). In the star formation process
high momentum outflowing material coupled to magnetic field lines sweeps up and removes the dense gas in
the core, creating an outflow cavity (Bally 2016). Significant deviations in the symmetry of the gas density
and magnetic field around the star will produce different
CR flux spectra and ionization rates in different regions.
Therefore, having a fully consistent treatment of the geometry of the gas density and magnetic field is crucial to
accurately modeling CR propagation within protostellar
disks, cores, and molecular clouds.
In this work we explore the propagation of CR protons accelerated by a protostellar accretion shock from
the star's surface to the edge of the protostellar core.
We model the propagation of the CRs numerically, using previous simulations of forming protostars as inputs
for the magnetic field and gas density in the core. We
use these results to compute the attenuation of the CR
energy spectrum and ionization rate as a function of radius from the protostar and solid angle, going beyond
the symmetric limitations of past theoretical studies.
We explore the impacts of different protostellar ages and
amount of magnetic turbulence in the core on the propagation of the CRs. In Section 2 we describe the model we
use and our numerical methods. In Section 3 we discuss
the results of the CR propagation and ionization rates
in the core. Finally, in Section 4 we compare our results
to observations and discuss the further implications of
our work.
2. METHODS

2.1. Model for CR Acceleration in Protostellar
Accretion Shocks
We consider CR acceleration through Diffusive Shock
Acceleration (DSA), or first order Fermi acceleration, in
which a charged particle encounters a shock and scatters
back and forth across the shock width due to magnetic
fluctuations, gaining energy as it does so (Drury 1983).
The shock must have the right conditions for the particle to be accelerated efficiently without losing too much
energy or leaving the shock. Specifically, the shock must
be super-sonic (Us > cs ) and super-Alfvénic (Us > vA ),
where Us , cs , and vA are the shock velocity, sound speed,

3

Protostellar CRs
and Alfvén speed, respectively. The sound speed in the
shock is given by (Padovani et al. 2019)

The shock density is given by:
ρs =



0.5
Ts
cs = 9.1 γad (1 + x)
km s−1 ,
104 K

(1)

where γad = 5/3 is the adiabatic index, Ts is the preshock temperature, and x is the ionization fraction (x ≈
1 at the surface of the star). The Alfvén velocity is given
by
vA = √

Bs
4πρs
−2

= 2.2 × 10



−0.5
ns
106 cm−3



Bs
10μG



km s−1 ,
(2)

where Bs is the shock magnetic field, ρs is the shock
mass density, and ns = μIρms H is the shock number density. Here μI is the mean molecular weight, and mH is
the atomic hydrogen mass. We assume a fully ionized
gas and use a value of μI = 0.6.
To compute the initial CR spectrum at the protostellar surface we follow the analytical calculation done by
Gaches & Offner (2018), which builds on the model from
Padovani et al. (2016). The properties of the spectrum
are determined by a model for the protostellar accretion
shock, which accelerates particles to relativistic energies. Gaches & Offner (2018) developed a semi-analytic
model for protostellar accretion and the corresponding
CR spectrum as a function of protostellar mass M∗ , protostellar radius R∗ , and accretion rate ṁ, which we describe further in Section 2.3.2. Their protostellar accretion shock model is parameterized by the shock velocity, temperature of the gas, and density of the gas
(Hartmann et al. 2016).
We assume the shock velocity, Us , is approximately
the free-fall velocity at the protostellar surface R∗ :
r

2GM∗
R∗

0.5 
−0.5
M∗
R∗
= 309
km s−1 .
0.5M
2R

Us =


−1
f
ṁ
= 8.387 × 10
10−5 M yr−1
0.1
−1
−2 

Us
R∗
g cm−3 ,
(5)
×
2R
309km s−1
−10



where A = 4πf R∗2 is the area of the accretion columns
and f is the filling fraction of the accretion columns on
the surface of the protostar.
The energy spectrum of cosmic rays produced by DSA
forms a power-law distribution in momentum space:

−α
p
f (p) = f0
,
(6)
pinj
where f0 is a normalization factor, pinj is the injection
momentum of thermal CR particles, and α is the powerlaw index, which is related to the shock compression
s
ratio rs by α = r3r
. The flux spectrum of the CRs is
s −1
given by:
v(E)N (E)
j(E) =
,
(7)
4π
where v(E) = βc is the velocity as a function of energy,
E, and the energy number density distribution is given
by:
dp
N (E) = 4πp2 f (p)
.
(8)
dE
The energy spectrum is defined over a range Einj <
E < Emax , where Einj is the injection energy of thermal CRs and Emax is the maximum energy for which
CRs can be efficiently accelerated by DSA. The injection energy, Einj , depends on the strength of the shock
and the hydrodynamic properties, while the maximum
energy Emax is determined by the magnetic field, ionization fraction, and shock acceleration efficiency (Gaches
& Offner 2018). The details describing the calculation of
these energy parameters are outlined in Gaches & Offner
(2018) and Padovani et al. (2016).
2.2. CR Propagation

(3)

In the strong shock regime, the post-shock temperature
is given by (Hartmann et al. 2016):
3 μI mH 2
Us
16 k
2
 μ 
Us
I
= 1.302 × 106
K.
0.6
309km s−1

ṁ
AUs

Ts =

(4)

2.2.1. Numerical Method
Our aim is to model the attenuation of the CR spectrum in the protostellar core after the CRs are accelerated at the surface by the accretion shock. Past studies
have calculated the attenuation of the spectrum analytically by making assumptions about the properties of the
core. Here, we instead follow the propagation of each individual CR particle through a realistic magnetic field
and density configuration. This method has the advantage that it accounts for spatial variations in the core

4

Fitz Axen et al.

properties and allows us to calculate attenuated spectra
and ionization rates in different regions of the core.
To compute the CR propagation we use a threedimensional, time-independent Monte Carlo radiation
transport code designed for the propagation of CR protons (Fitz Axen et al. 2021). A CR source can be placed
at any location in the grid and emits particles in random
initial directions. The code propagates particles through
a three dimensional grid of cubic cells with physical
properties (density, bulk magnetic field) that are constant within each cell. The particles travel through the
grid from their starting location until they exit one of
the grid boundaries.
The code determines the propagation of particles by
approximating the Lorentz equation of motion. The
Lorentz equation describes the motion of particles spiraling around a magnetic field line, with a gyroradius
of motion rg . For a charged particle moving with velocity, v(t), through a magnetic field, B(x), the Lorentz
equation is:
du(t)
γβ
=
(v(t) × B̂(x)),
dt
rg

(9)

where u(t) = γv(t)/c, c is the speed of light, and γ and β
are the Lorentz factors, which
p are related to the velocity
of the particle by γ = 1/ 1 − v 2 /c2 and β = v/c. The
gyroradius for a particle with charge, e, is given by
pc
rg =
= 2.2 × 10−3 β
eB



Etot
GeV



B
100μG

−1
au, (10)

where p = mvγ is the momentum of the particle, m is
the mass of the particle, and Etot = E + m2c . For a
proton with a kinetic energy of 1 GeV in a magnetic
field of strength 100 μG, typical of our problem, rg is
much smaller than the grid cells we model.
Solving Equation 9 is computationally expensive because of the number of directional changes the particle
makes. Therefore, the code makes the common approximation that the particle simply follows the magnetic
field line that it experiences (Harding et al. 2016; Fitz
Axen et al. 2021). This is a valid approximation as long
as rg changes on a much smaller scale than the magnetic
field because of the assumption that solving Equation 9
would be unlikely to move the particle into a region with
a different magnetic field. Under this approximation,
the particle does not change direction until the direction of the local magnetic field changes. For a particle
traveling for a timestep ∆t, the particle's position at
time t + ∆t can be calculated as:
x(t + ∆t) = x(t) +

(v(t) * B)
B̂∆t,
B

(11)

where x and v are the particle's position and velocity at
time t. The particle travels either parallel or antiparallel
to the direction of the magnetic field line.
The distance the particle travels in a single step
∆x = v∆t is sampled using the scattering path length
λsc , which is the expected distance the particle travels
before the local magnetic field changes. For the scattering length we adopt the expression from Equation 3 in
Fryer et al. (2007):
2−q

λsc = c(γβ)

8
f (βA )
π(q − 1)σ 2 ckmin



ckmin
Ω

2−q
.

(12)
Here the quantity f (βA ) is a function of the Alfvén velocity βA in the plasma, q is the index of the power
spectrum for the turbulence, and σ 2 = (δB/B0 )2 is the
power of the turbulent fluctuation δB relative to the
bulk magnetic field B0 . The bulk magnetic field B0 is
the mean magnetic field over some distance, in our case,
a grid cell. The minimum wavenumber of the magnetic
field kmin is related to the maximum scale length of the
magnetic field by kmin = 2π/λmax , where λmax ≈ Lc ,
the correlation length of the magnetic field.
Particles with a scattering length λsc follow an exponential probability distribution for their motion,
P (∆x) = e−∆x/λsc . Solving this equation for the cumulative distribution function (CDF) gives χ = 1 −
e−∆x/λsc , where χ is a random value sampled between
0 and 1. This can be rearranged to sample a distance
traveled for that step as:
∆x = −ln(χ)λsc .

(13)

If δB = 0, there is no magnetic turbulence, and λsc is
infinite. In this case, ∆x is limited by the size of the
grid cell as the particle will change direction only when
it encounters a new value of B0 .
For each particle step through the grid, (i.e, each recalculation of ∆x) the code samples the magnetic field
and computes the path length for the next step. The
method checks whether traveling this distance would
take the particle into a different grid cell where there
is a different bulk magnetic field. If it does, the particle
travels only to the edge of the cell, even if this distance is
less than ∆x. When it enters a new cell its path length
and travel distance are resampled and its motion continues along the previously determined direction (Harding
et al. 2016; Fitz Axen et al. 2021).
The code also calculates the energy losses the CR particles experience after every step. As CRs propagate
through the gas, they undergo interactions that cause
them to lose energy and change the shape of the flux
spectrum. These energy losses can be represented as a

5

Protostellar CRs
loss function, L(E), which is defined as:
L(E) =

1 dE
1
dE
=
,
n(H2 ) dx
n(H2 )v dt

(14)

where n(H2 ) = ρ/2.8mH is the local number density of
molecular hydrogen.
2.2.2. Magnetic Field Treatment
The coupling between CRs and the mean magnetic
field is determined by the amount of magnetic turbulence (Rodgers-Lee et al. 2017; Thomas & Pfrommer
2019; Bai et al. 2019). Dense protostellar cores are
expected to be at least sub-sonically turbulent, while
outflows and disk winds can drive additional turbulence (Bai 2016; Offner & Chaban 2017). Additionally,
MHD turbulence can be driven by streaming instabilities
caused by anisotropies in the CR distribution function
(Morlino & Gabici 2015; Padovani et al. 2020). The
amount of turbulence is relatively unknown, however,
and depends on parameters such as the core formation
process, infall from the envelope, and gas properties such
as magnetic field strength and ionization.
Particles in a turbulent magnetic field approximate
a random walk. This means that for many particles,
the positions will be isotropically distributed in angle
around their source at distances much further away than
a scattering length. For this reason, many commonly
used CR propagation codes such as GALPROP assume
that CRs propagate entirely due to spatial and momentum diffusion (Strong & Moskalenko 1998). In the absence of energy losses, the attenuation of the CR flux
in a turbulent magnetic field can be solved for analytically: j(E, r) ∝ jin (E)r−1 , where jin (E) is the flux at
the stellar surface R∗ . The opposite extreme is the free
streaming solution, in which particles are in a completely
isotropic magnetic field and do not change direction at
all. In the free streaming limit, without energy losses,
the flux attenuates as j(E, r) ∝ jin (E)r−2 .
In Fraschetti et al. (2018), the authors perform testparticle numerical simulations of protons propagating in
a T-Tauri stellar wind. They include a two component
treatment for their magnetic field structure- a large scale
component, B0 (x), that is generated by MHD simulations and is constant within each grid cell, and a smallscale turbulent component, δB(x), which changes on
scales smaller than a grid cell. Following Giacalone &
Jokipii (1999), they explicitly calculate the direction of
the turbulent component for every particle step as a sum
over plane waves with randomly sampled polarizations
and phases using a Kolmogorov power spectrum. They
then use this to calculate the total magnitude and direction of the magnetic field as B(x) = B0 (x) + δB(x),
and follow particle propagation along this field line.

While this method for modeling turbulence is widely
used, recomputing the turbulent field at every particle
step is computationally expensive if the path length is
much smaller than the grid. We follow Fraschetti et al.
(2018) by modeling the magnetic field as having both
a bulk component B0 (x) and a turbulent component
δB(x). Unlike Fraschetti et al. (2018), however, we treat
the turbulent component δB(x) statistically, which allows us to examine a range of behaviors between strong
turbulence and no turbulence. By choosing to use an
alternative method for CR transport, we ensure that we
can run many particles through the full extent of our
grid.
To determine the particle travel direction, we use a
numerical method in which the particles either follow
the bulk magnetic field direction or approximate random
walk motion (Fitz Axen et al. 2021). For every step,
we sample a random number χ between 0 and 1 and
compare that to the regular field amplitude ratio b =
B0 (x)/B(x), where B(x) = B0 (x) + δB(x) is the sum of
the magnitudes of the two components and b is related
to the turbulent power by σ 2 = ( 1b − 1)2 . If χ > b,
then the particle travel direction is sampled randomly
to approximate random walk motion. If χ < b, then
the particle follows the bulk magnetic field with one of
two directions (either parallel or antiparallel to it) based
on the velocity of its previous step. For example, if the
amplitudes of the global and turbulent field are the same
(σ 2 = 1), then b = 0.5, and a particle will have a 50 %
probability of following the direction of B0 and a 50 %
probability of sampling a random direction.
We do not have a simple method for testing our two
component magnetic field treatment. However, we did
test the behavior of our code in the free streaming and
diffusion limits. First, we tested the behavior of the code
in these limits without energy losses and verified that we
reproduced the analytical solutions for the flux attenuation. We also tested both of these limits with energy
losses and compared the results to a model developed by
Silsbee & Ivlev (2019). These tests are described further
in Appendix C.2.
2.3. Initial Conditions
2.3.1. Gas Distribution
We take the magnetic field and density grid inputs and the initial conditions for the protostar from
the magneto-hydrodynamic simulations performed by
Offner & Chaban (2017). This study modeled the collapse of a dense core and the subsequent formation of
a protostar for different initial magnetic field strengths
and core masses. The simulations use the orion2 adaptive mesh refinement code (Li et al. 2012). orion2 is a

6

Fitz Axen et al.

code which includes ideal magnetohydro-dynamics, selfgravity, gray radiative transfer, radiative feedback, and
star particles with a model for protostellar evolution.
Protostars form in the simulations when the density in a
cell becomes high enough to violate the Jeans condition
(Krumholz et al. 2004). The protostar interacts with
its surroundings by accreting, radiating, and launching
gas outflows (Offner et al. 2009; Krumholz et al. 2004;
Cunningham et al. 2011). The accretion shock onto the
protostar is our CR source as described in Gaches &
Offner (2018).
The domain extent of the MHD simulations is L =
0.26 pc, twice the initial diameter of the core, and the
basegrid has 2563 cells. Five AMR levels are used to
reach a maximum resolution of ∆xAMR ≈ 26 au. We
use the density and magnetic field outputs at two different times to compute the CR propagation. The MHD
code also includes a tracer fluid which tracks the density
of the gas launched in the outflow. Following Offner &
Chaban (2017), we define the tracer fraction Ft = ρt /ρ,
which is the ratio of outflow gas density to total gas
density in a grid cell. This ratio indicates the amount of
material launched in the outflow and reflects the amount
of mixing and entrainment of core material with the outflow. While most grid cells have values of Ft < 0.01, we
define the outflow as those cells with Ft > 0.1. We
examine cutoff values of Ft = 0.01, Ft = 0.05, and
Ft,out = 0.1 to study regions of progressively wider collimation around the outflow cavity. While this quantity is
not relevant to CR propagation, we use it to investigate
how the outflow geometry influences the CR distribution.
We use the outputs of the fiducial run from Offner &
Chaban (2017) and summarize the physical parameters
in Table 1. We use the simulation outputs at two different times, t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr, in order
to study the effect of protostellar age and changes to
the core properties on CR propagation. The masses of
the protostar at the two times are 0.83 M and 1.07
M , at t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr respectively. Figure 1 shows volume renderings of the gas energy density
at these two times. Figure 2 shows slice plots of the
grid density and magnetic field through the center of
the star at the two times. The shape of the outflow cavity and the magnetic field configuration shown in these
plots are mostly dependant on the initial magnetic field
used in the Offner & Chaban (2017) simulations. Figure
2 demonstrates that in these grids the direction of the
magnetic field is asymmetric and correlated with the
direction of the outflow cavity. Decreasing the initial
magnetic field strength in the MHD simulations by a

factor of a few would cause more asymmetry in the gas
density and magnetic field direction (Lee et al. 2017).
We discuss how the protostellar accretion rate and
radius impact the CR spectrum in more detail in Section
2.3.2.
2.3.2. Input CR Spectrum Properties
For the initial CR energy spectrum at each time, we
use the accretion shock model outlined in Section 2.1
which was developed by Gaches & Offner (2018). In
their model, the initial spectrum of accelerated CRs depends on the mass, radius, and accretion rate of the protostar, which evolve during the Offner & Chaban (2017)
simulations as the star forms. It also depends on the
filling fraction f , stellar magnetic field B∗ , and shock
efficiency η.
The mass, radius, and accretion rate of the protostar
are determined by a model for protostellar evolution.
The radius is a somewhat uncertain parameter and may
not be single valued with mass due to the potential influence of underlying factors on the evolution, such as
initial conditions and the accretion details. Additionally, there is uncertainty in the protostellar evolution
model, which depends on the accretion history, assumed
initial radius and accretion efficiency (Hosokawa et al.
2011).The protostellar radius adopted by the star particles in orion2 depends on the accretion history and
is calculated as described in Offner et al. (2009). Given
uncertainties in pre-main sequence models, protostellar
radii are uncertain to factors of ∼ 2.
The accretion rate is known to be variable, and often fluctuates over small timescales during the Offner
& Chaban (2017) simulations, varying up to an order
of magnitude. This is consistent with the expectation
that young stars undergo accretion bursts (Audard et al.
2014). The area of the accretion columns is A = 4πf R∗2 ,
where f is the accretion flow filling fraction (Gaches
& Offner 2018). The value of ṁ typically scales with
f , as faster accreting protostars have larger accretion
columns. Additionally, for a star with a fixed mass, the
stellar radius is higher for higher internal entropy; therefore, we expect the value of R∗ to scale with ṁ as well
(Hosokawa et al. 2011).
The three most uncertain parameters in the model
are the filling fraction f , protostellar magnetic field B∗ ,
and shock efficiency parameter η. Studies of T Tauri
stars infer a magnetic field of a few G to a few kG
(Johns-Krull 2007; Donati et al. 2011; Johnstone et al.
2014). This is a later stage of evolution than we consider for our simulations, but these studies suggest reasonable values to assume for protostellar magnetic field
strengths. The SPIRou spectrograph (Artigau et al.

7

Protostellar CRs
Model
MP45

Mcore (M )
4.0

lmax
5

∆xAMR (au)
26

Bz (μG)
20.6

Mφ (M )
0.80

μφ
5

Mcr,eff (M )
1.27

μφ,eff
3.15

vi (kms−1 )
0.52

Table 1. Shows the inputs used in the Offner & Chaban (2017) simulations that we use. Columns are the model name, gas mass,
maximum AMR level, cell size on the maximum level, magnitude of the initial magnetic field in the z direction, the magnetic
mass, mass-to-flux ratio, effective magnetic critical mass, effective mass-to-flux ratio, and initial rms turbulent velocity. The
molecular core has an initial radius of Rc = 0.065pc, a uniform density, an initial temperature Tc = 10K, and an initial virial
parameter of αvir = 2.0. For a detailed description of these paramaters, see Offner & Chaban (2017).

Figure 1. Volume renderings of the gas energy density at t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr.

Figure 2. A slice plot through the center of the star at t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr. Colorscale indicates the gas density.
Contours outline the location of the outflow, with Ft > 0.01 in yellow, Ft > 0.05 in brown, and Ft > 0.1 in red. Vectors show
the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field, which varies between ≈ 10 μG and ≈ 1 mG in our grid. The white star
indicates the location of the protostar, which is located slightly off center of the grid and is discussed in Section 3.4.

2014) aims to study stellar magnetism at earlier stages

and should provide better values of B∗ for future studies.

8

Fitz Axen et al.

The shock efficiency parameter represents the fraction of
particles accelerated by the shock, and is constrained by
the temperatures associated with protostellar shocks to
be ≈ 10−6 − 10−4 (Padovani et al. 2016). A filling fraction of f = 0.1 represents a moderately accreting protostar, but this value may be higher for younger sources
and lower for older sources (Hartmann et al. 2016). Finally, for the shock compression ratio, we use a value
of rs ≈ 2, which is appropriate for the high temperatures near a protostar (Padovani et al. 2016). Further
discussion of these parameters can be found in Gaches
& Offner (2018) and Padovani et al. (2016).
For our fiducial runs, we use the values of the radius
and accretion rate at t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr given
by the output of the Offner & Chaban (2017) simulations. We adopt values of f = 0.1, B∗ = 10 G, and
η = 10−5 following Gaches & Offner (2018). Then, for
each time, we study the impact of varying R∗ , ṁ, f , and
η within the limits discussed to produce both a high input CR spectrum and a low input CR spectrum. The
accretion rate is the dominant parameter in each model,
as varying the accretion rate has the largest impact on
the spectrum; therefore, these variations can be thought
of as 'high accretion' and 'low accretion' models. We do
not vary the stellar magnetic field B∗ because it has
a negligible impact on the magnitude of the spectrum.
The parameter values for all of the runs are given in
Table 2.
The values of the stellar parameters also impact the
maximum energy of the CRs, Emax , in the initial spectrum. As shown in Gaches & Offner (2018), the maximum energy is determined by the outcomes of three different processes; upstream escape, wave damping and
collisions; which of these effects dominates is highly
parameter dependant. Here, we choose to set it at
Emax = 3 GeV for all of the initial spectra. This is
roughly the median of the range of values that Emax can
take, about 1-10 GeV (Gaches & Offner 2018). Moreover, the ionization by CRs with energies above 100
MeV is insignificant due to their low ionization cross
section (see Padovani et al. (2009), Figure 1), so this
choice does not significantly impact our results. Similarly, particles with energies below 100 keV also have
a low cross section (Padovani et al. 2009) and lose energy too rapidly to contribute significantly to ionization;
thus, we set Emin = 100 keV.
Figure 3 shows the initial spectra calculated for protons at the two evolution times. At lower energies, the
spectra have a power-law behavior with index -1.9. The
index in Equation 6 is α ≈ 6, so j(p) ∝ p2√
f (p) ∝
p−4 (Amato 2014). At lower energies, p ∝ E, so
j(E) ∝ E −2 . Above 938 MeV (the proton rest mass),

p ∝ E, so the spectrum turns over and eventually limits
to j(E) ∝ E −4 .

Figure 3. CR proton spectra at the accretion shock at times
t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr. Solid lines show the input
spectrum using fiducial values of f , η, R∗ , and ṁ, while the
dashed and dashdot lines show the 'high' input CR spectra
and 'low' CR input spectra. The slopes follow a power law
with index −1.9 at lower energies.

We inject the CRs at the location of the protostar,
which is located at [X,Y,Z]=[0.00396, -0.00488, -0.00191]
pc for the t = 0.3 Myr grid and at [X,Y,Z]=[0.01584, 0.01579, -0.01428] pc for the t = 0.5 Myr grid, shown by
the white stars in Figure 2. To calculate the energy of
each particle, we divide the input energy spectrum into
NE = 50 logarithmically spaced energy bins between
Emin and Emax , and sample the same number of initial
particles NP E = 1000 from each bin. The total number
of particles is N = 50NP E . Running a higher number of
particles produces less statistical error; but is more expensive. We discuss our choice of NP E in further detail
and provide convergence tests in Appendix A.2.
We compute the proton propagation in two stages.
First, we use the highest resolution AMR grid and propagate the particles from R∗ ≈ 0 pc out to Rstart = 0.001
pc, which is approximately the size of one grid cell in
the lowest resolution grid. This gives us a modified spectrum jstart at Rstart . We include this step to capture the
higher resolution magnetic field and density information
close to the star where the gas densities are higher and
may cause significant CR energy losses. We then use
the lower resolution AMR grid to propagate the particles from Rstart out to the edge of the protostellar core
at Rcore = 0.1 pc. We switch to using only this grid
for most of the CR propagation to reduce the compu-

9

Protostellar CRs
Name
MP45 0.3
MP45 0.5
MP45 0.3 High
MP45 0.3 High
MP45 0.3 Low
MP45 0.3 Low

Time (Myr)
0.3
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.3
0.5

Mcore,104 (M )
1.76
0.79
1.76
0.79
1.76
0.79

M∗ (M )
0.83
1.07
0.83
1.07
0.83
1.07

R∗ (R )
7.15
6.83
7.15
6.83
3.58
3.42

ṁ(M /yr)
2.55 × 10−6
4.39 × 10−7
2.55 × 10−5
4.39 × 10−6
2.55 × 10−7
4.39 × 10−8

L∗ (L )
9.27
2.15
92.68
21.53
1.85
0.43

f
0.1
0.1
0.9
0.9
0.05
0.05

η
10−5
10−5
10−4
10−4
10−6
10−6

Table 2. Properties of the protostar that we use to construct the initial CR spectra. First three columns are the simulation
name, time, and core mass. Remaining columns are protostellar mass, radius, accretion rate, and accretion luminosity, and the
stellar filling fraction and shock efficiency. All runs assume a stellar magnetic field of B∗ = 10 G. The input CR spectrum for
each setup is shown in Figure 3
.

tational expense of the simulations and ensure that we
run particles all the way to the edge of the core.
For the first and second stages of the propagation,
the magnitudes of j∗ and jstart respectively are captured
in the weight function of each particle. Each particle
begins with an energy Ei,init . The weight of each particle
is given by
Wi =

2
jinit (Ei,init )4πRinit
dE(Ei,init ) particles
.
NP E
s

(15)

where Rinit = R∗ and jinit = j∗ for stage 1 and
Rinit = Rstart and jinit = jstart for stage 2. Adopting
this weight function allows us to use the same number of
particles NP E in each bin and thereby reduce statistical
uncertainties, while preserving the initial flux information at each energy. For the second stage runs, particles
do not change direction or experience energy losses below Rstart , thereby preserving the information encoded
in their weight function from jstart . We note that this
is not a perfect approximation, since it does not allow
particles to propagate back inside Rstart and lose energy.
2.3.3. CR Propagation Parameters
The two problem-specific parameters that are not
specified by the outputs of the Offner & Chaban (2017)
simulations are the scattering length (12), particularly
its dependance on the turbulence δB(x), and the particle energy loss function (14). The scattering length
is calculated using Equation 12. The function f (βA )
scales weakly with βA , going as log(βA ), so we follow
Fryer et al. (2007) and set it to a constant f (βA ) = 5.
We assume the turbulence power spectrum to be scaleinvariant, and Kolmogorov, which is described by a
power-law index of q = 5/3. Using these values the
expression for the path length can be rewritten in terms
of the gyroradius as (Fraschetti et al. 2018):
1/3
2
λsc ≈ 5.6L2/3
c rg /σ .

(16)
1/3

Equation 16 shows that the path length is only ∝ rg ,
and so it is not a strong function of the coherent mag-

netic field strength or particle energy. However, it is
a stronger function of the correlation length Lc and
the power of the turbulence σ 2 . The value of Lc is
itself an uncertain parameter. Measurements of turbulence in molecular clouds have produced values of
Lc ∼ 10−3 − 10−1 pc (Houde et al. 2011, 2016); however, local outflow driving may produce smaller scale
turbulence that is unresolved by detectors. Values of
the correlation length that are this large give values for
the path length that are larger than the size of our grid
cells. In the Offner & Chaban (2017) simulations, turbulence is followed self-consistently from the size of the
outflow down to the size of a few grid cells (≈ 0.001
pc), but smaller scales are effectively under-turbulent
due to numerical dissipation. As discussed in Section
2.2.1, our algorithm requires particles to resample their
path length but not their direction when they enter a
new grid cell; therefore, the path length should be sufficiently small that the particles are resampling their
direction a few times in each cell. Given this, we adopt
Lc = 10−5 pc, which explores the possibility of small
scale turbulence that may result from local outflow driving within dense cores and is not resolved by detectors
or by the simulation. We also test Lc = 10−4 pc, which
is included in the Appendix.
We also vary the relative power of the turbulence by
exploring different values of σ 2 . As in the case of Lc ,
the value of σ 2 is not well constrained for dense cores.
We assume σ 2 is constant across the grid for each run
(similar to Fraschetti et al. (2018)). Houde et al. (2009)
measured the value of hδB 2 i/hB02 i in OMC-1 and found
hδB 2 i/hB02 i = 0.28. In contrast, Pineda et al. (2020)
estimated δB ≈ 27μG inside the dense core Barnard
5, which is ≈ 5% of the previously estimated value of
the static magnetic field of B0 ≈ 500μG (corresponding
to σ 2 ≈ 0.003). We study three different values- σ 2 =
0.01, σ 2 = 0.1, and σ 2 = 1.0, as did Fraschetti et al.
(2018). This spans a wide range of possibilities for the
turbulent power, from conditions where the turbulence

10

Fitz Axen et al.

is negligible (σ 2 = 0.01) to those where it is significant
(σ 2 = 1.0).
To model energy losses, we use the loss function from
Padovani et al. (2009) for protons in a molecular cloud.
Between 100 keV and 1 GeV, energy losses are dominated by collisions with molecular hydrogen, exciting
electronic excitations and inducing ionizations. At GeV
and higher energies, energy losses are dominated by pion
production, resulting in gamma radiation.
3. RESULTS

3.1. CR Flux in Protostellar Cores
The flux as a function of radius is computed as
X  Wi  particles
1
1
j(Eb , r) =
, (17)
4πr2 dE 1/μi
μi
scm2 eV
N (r)
hit

where the sum is over Nhit (r) particles that reach position r in bin Eb , μi = n̂ * v̂ is the cosine of the crossing
angle of particle i, and Wi is the weight of particle i.
The subscript b for the energy refers to the fact that the
particle is in an energy bin b and thus can have a range
of values. Using the weight function given in Equation
15, the flux can be written:

pc as a function of the effective column density they
pass through as they propagate for both times. At
both times, the lower energy particles lose all their energy before traveling through very much of the core
material while the higher energy particles can propagate through most of the gas without losing any energy. However, the particle behavior between the two
grids differs at intermediate energies (Ei = 5.66 MeV,
Ei = 16.81 MeV, and Ei = 48.51 MeV) due to differences in the density and magnetic field. At t = 0.3
Myr, the particles traveled through an average column
density of N ∼ 1022 − 1023 cm−2 , while at t = 0.5
Myr the particles traveled through a column density of
N ∼ 1021 − 1022 cm−2 . As a result, in the t = 0.3 Myr
run particles with higher initial energies experienced
more significant energy losses than at the t = 0.5 Myr,
and the value of Eturn (r) is slightly greater at t = 0.3
Myr than at t = 0.5 Myr.
3.2. Impact of Outflow Geometry on CR Propagation

During particle propagation, the code tallies the particle position as a function of solid angle in addition to
radius. The flux in one angular bin is calculated as
 2
R∗
Nθ Nφ 1
j(Eb , r, θb , φb ) =
×
r
NP E 1/μi
 2


X


1
R∗
1
jinit (Ei,init ) particles
X
jinit (Ei,init ) particles
.
j(Eb , r) =
2
,
(19)
r
NP E 1/μi
μi
scm eV
Nhit (r)
μi
scm2 eV
Nhit (r,θb ,φb )
(18)
We first compute the CR proton spectrum as a funcwhere Nhit (r, θb , φb ) is the number of particles that
tion of radius away from the protostar for our fiducial
reached position r in bin (θb , φb ) and the extra factors
configuration, σ 2 = 0. Figure 4 shows the attenuated
of Nθ and Nφ are the numbers of polar and azimuthal
CR proton spectra computed at t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5
angle bins respectively and account for the crossing area
Myr. For both times, the spectra show an overall decline
of each bin relative to that of the entire sphere. The anwith radius due to geometric attenuation and a turnover
gular bins are discretized uniform in cos(θ) and φ using
in the spectrum due to energy losses. The similarity of
Nθ = 40 and Nφ = 40, giving each bin a solid angle
the spectra at higher energies to the solutions at Rstart ,
of Ω = 4π/(Nθ Nφ ) = 7.85 × 10−3 sr. The subscripts b
shown by the dashed black curves, implies that partifor the solid angle quantities refer to the fact that, simcles of these energies do not change energy significantly,
ilar to energy, particles can have a range of values of θ
as this would change the slope. Additionally, at higher
and φ, and we do not add to the tally when θb or φb
energies the spectra follow the free streaming solution,
changes for a particle i. Since Equation 19 accounts for
shown by the colored dashed lines in the panels. The
the area of each bin, it would give the same result for
point at which the spectra turn over, Eturn (r), is roughly
each angular bin as Equation 18 if particle propagation
equal to the point at which they deviate from the free
were isotropic, as has been assumed in previous studies.
streaming solution. The similarity of the spectrum to
To distinguish the location of the outflow,we compare
the free streaming solution at energies above Eturn (r)
the flux in different regions of the grid with different
implies that the geometry of the magnetic field does
values of the tracer fraction Ft . We compute the tracer
not change the particle travel directions significantly, befraction in spherical coordinates and then categorize evcause if the particles scattered significantly the flux at
ery spherical bin as being either in the outflow with
these energies would be higher than the free streaming
Ft > 0.1 or outside the outflow with Ft < 0.1. We
solution.
then compute the average values of j(Eb , r, θb , φb ) using
Figure 5 shows the relative change in energy ∆E/Ei
different lower limit cutoffs of Ft . We denote these averexperienced by a subset of 1000 particles out to 0.1
ages over select angular bins at a radius r as j(Eb , r)>Ft .

Protostellar CRs

11

Figure 4. CR proton energy spectrum as a function of radius at t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr. Solid black lines show the
unattenuated spectrum at R∗ , while dashed black lines show the attenuated spectrum at Rstart = 0.001 pc. Colored lines show
the spectrum at different distances from the star, with the free streaming solution from Rstart plotted in dashed lines. Black
dots show Eturn (r), which is the energy at which the spectrum is a maximum. Below Eturn (r), the spectrum turns over due to
energy losses.

Figure 5. Relative change in energy experienced by 1000 particles per initial energy for t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr as a
function of effective column density they pass through as they propagate, starting at eight different energies.

12

Fitz Axen et al.

Figure 6 shows these results for three different radiir = 0.01 pc, r = 0.05 pc, and r = 0.1 pc. We define j(Eb , r)>0.1 = j(Eb , r)out as the average flux in the
outflow region.
For both times, the flux in the outflow cavity is higher
at all energies and distances than the average flux in the
core. This is due to two possibilities. The first is that the
magnetic field becomes aligned with the outflow region
and can funnel particles into it, creating a higher flux
inside the outflow region than outside. The second is
that the gas densities inside the outflow are lower then
the gas densities outside the outflow, decreasing energy
losses in these regions.
The prevalence of the magnetic field alignment can
be deduced by comparing the shape of the average flux
spectrum and the outflow flux spectrum above Eturn (r).
At energies above Eturn (r), particles are not affected
by higher density regions and are only affected by the
magnetic field properties. This means that the magnetic field behavior can be deduced from the spectrum
at these energies, and if the flux in the outflow is higher
than average at these energies, there is a tendency for
the magnetic field to be leading particles into the outflow. This can be seen in all six panels of Figure 6.
The spatial properties of the gas density can be inferred by comparing the offset of the outflow flux from
the average flux above and below Eturn (r). If the offset
between the curves is higher below Eturn (r) than above
Eturn (r), then there is a positive correlation between
lower gas densities and the outflow region. This behavior can be seen in Figure 6 for all three panels of t = 0.3
Myr (top row). For the three panels of t = 0.5 Myr
(bottom row), the spectrum is relatively even across all
energies, indicating a minor correlation or no correlation; although there is the caveat that at large distances
low energy particles are present mostly because they are
repopulated by the higher energy particles losing energy,
so in some sense they are 'following' what the higher energy particles are doing and it is harder to infer density
information.
Figures 7 and 8 show visual representations of the CR
flux in a single energy bin computed at the two times.
The size and color of the dots indicates the magnitude
of the CR flux relative to the other regions of the panel,
with blank areas indicating no CR flux in that area.
These plots show the prevalence for particles to be more
highly concentrated in the outflow, shown by the background colorscale, than in other regions of the grid. For
example, for E > Eturn (r) for t = 0.3 Myr (bottom
row of plots in Figure 7), all three panels show many
regions with zero flux; however, the areas inside the regions with a higher tracer fraction for each plot are al-

most completely filled. This is what gives the outflow
fluxes above the average at high energies shown in the
top row of plots of Figure 6. The same effect is true at
E < Eturn (r), depicted visually in the top row of plots
of Figure 7.
These plots also show that the flux of high energy particles is more stochastically distributed than the flux of
low energy particles. For example, at r = 0.01 pc for
t = 0.3 Myr (left panels of Figure 7), there are visibly
more regions with a nonzero flux in the bottom plot depicting the flux for E > Eturn (r) than there are for the
top plot depicting the flux for E < Eturn (r). This is because particles of all energies follow magnetic field lines,
but particles of lower energies are kept out of certain
regions due to higher gas density. The consequence of
this is that all regions of the core with a nonzero flux
of low energy particles also have a nonzero flux of high
energy particles, but the converse is not always true.
3.3. Cosmic Ray Ionization Rate
Using the results for j(Eb , r) shown in Figure 4, we
compute the ionization rate. The ionization rate at a
radius r is calculated as:
Z
ζ(r) = 4π j(Eb , r)σ ion (Eb )dE,
(20)
where σ ion is the proton ionization cross section (Rudd
et al. 1985; Rudd 1991; Padovani et al. 2009). We also
compute the ionization rate as a function of solid angle.
Similarly to Equation 20, it is given by
Z
ζ(r, θb , φb ) = 4π j(Eb , r, θb , φb )σ ion (Eb )dE. (21)
As with our results for the flux, we compute the average
values of ζ(r, θb , φb ) using angular bins with Ft > 0.01,
Ft > 0.05, and Ft > 0.1, and denote these averages
ζ(r)>Ft . Figure 9 shows the ionization rate at t = 0.3
Myr and t = 0.5 Myr.
For both times, the average ionization rate in the outflow is higher than the total average at all distances from
the star. Furthermore, the offset between the average
flux and the outflow flux is reflected in the offset of the
average and outflow ionization rates. For example, as is
seen in the bottom three panels of Figure 6, at t = 0.5
Myr the discrepancy between the outflow flux and the
average flux widens with increasing distance from the
star. This is reflected in the right panel of Figure 9, in
which the ionization in the outflow is further offset from
the average ionization rate at further distances. This
reflects particles being funneled into the outflow as they
propagate outwards.
The high gas densities in the core cause the average
ionization rate to be lower than the fiducial value of

Protostellar CRs

13

Figure 6. Average flux for all spherical bins with Ft > 0.01 (yellow), Ft > 0.05 (red), and Ft > 0.1 (brown) for t = 0.3 Myr
(top) and t = 0.5 Myr (bottom) at r = 0.01 pc, r = 0.05 pc, and r = 0.1 pc. Black dots show Eturn (r), which is the energy at
which the radial spectrum is a maximum.

Figure 7. Flux in particles s−1 cm−2 eV−1 for energy bins with Eb = 2.2 − 2.7 MeV (top) and Eb = 1070 − 1315 MeV (bottom)
computed in different regions of the grid for t = 0.3 Myr, at r = 0.01 pc, r = 0.05 pc, and r = 0.1 pc. The legends indicate the
range of flux values each dot represents, where larger, darker colored dots represent higher flux. Regions without any dots have
zero flux. Colorscale indicates the tracer fraction.

14

Fitz Axen et al.

Figure 8. Flux in particles s−1 cm−2 eV−1 for energy bins with Eb = 2.2 − 2.7 MeV (top) and Eb = 1070 − 1315 MeV (bottom)
computed in different regions of the grid for t = 0.5 Myr, at r = 0.01 pc, r = 0.05 pc, and r = 0.1 pc. The legends indicate the
range of flux values each dot represents, where larger, darker colored dots represent higher flux. Regions without any dots have
zero flux. Colorscale indicates the tracer fraction.

Protostellar CRs

15

ζ = 10−16 s−1 , but some regions of the grid can have
much higher ionization rates. For example, at t = 0.3
Myr (left panel), the five innermost radii have average
ionization rate values between 10−18 and 10−16 s−1 ; but
the peak ionization rates measured there are all between
10−16 and 10−14 s−1 . This highlights the importance of
considering the geometry of the magnetic field and density in CR propagation calculations, as these can cause
variations in the ionization rate greater than two orders
of magnitude.
Figure 10 shows the angular distribution of ionization
rates for the two times at r = 0.01 pc, r = 0.05 pc,
and r = 0.1 pc. These plots have more dotted regions
indicating a nonzero ionization rate than appear in Figures 7 and 8 because they include the influence of the
flux at all fifty energy bins rather than a single bin as is
plotted in the top and bottom rows of Figures 7 and 8.
However, many of the same regions that have a nonzero
flux shown in Figures 7 and 8 are reflected by a higher
ionization rate in Figure 10. For example, at r = 0.05
pc for t = 0.3 Myr (middle column of Figure 7), the outflow regions have a higher average flux of both high and
low energy particles than the averages for those energies
outside the outflow. Similarly, the spatial distribution of
the ionization rate for this case (top middle plot of Figure 10) shows a much higher average inside the outflow
than outside, with all of the regions with no ionization
occurring outside the outflow.

of this is that we expect there to be a large variation in
ionization over time, especially if the star is undergoing
intense, frequent bursts.
One factor that we do not consider in these models
is the coupling of the CRs to the gas in the accretion
flow because it occurs on lengthscales smaller than the
simulation grid resolution. As CRs travel through the
accretion flow between the star and the inner disk they
will experience energy losses (Offner et al. 2019). The
extent of the losses depends in part on the covering fraction of the accretion over the stellar surface, which is expected to be larger for higher accretion rates (Hartmann
et al. 2016). Stars with low accretion rates may have significant enhancement of radionuclide production in the
disk due to the enrichment from uncoupled CRs (Gaches
et al. 2020). Although stars with high accretion rates
have a higher unattenuated CR spectrum at the stellar
surface due to the shock properties, the CRs may experience more energy losses close to the star compared to
the low accretion case. Offner et al. (2019) parametrize
this uncertainty using a parameter , which quantifies
the interaction between the CRs and the accretion flow.
A value of  = 1 indicates the accretion rate is constant
and that all of the CRs traverse the full accretion column. Here, we essentially assume  = 0 for all models;
i.e., that CRs propagating through the core and outflow
are not strongly coupled to the accretion streams and
do not undergo energy losses.

3.4. Impact of Different Protostellar Properties

3.5. Impact of Small Scale Magnetic Turbulence

As discussed in Section 2.3, several parameters affect
the input CR spectrum. In particular, the accretion
rate varies over several orders of magnitude and consequently has a large impact on the CR spectrum. Additionally, the radius of the star at any time is uncertain
due to our accretion model. Finally, the other parameters of the CR spectrum model- the filling fraction, shock
efficiency, and stellar magnetic field- are not well constrained observationally or theoretically. In this section,
we assess the impact of different stellar assumptions on
the resulting ionization rate.
Figure 11 shows the ionization rate as a function of
radius using the different input CR spectra indicated in
Table 2 and shown in Figure 3. The high accretion rate
models for both times have regions where the ionization
rate is above the Milky Way value of 10−16 s−1 throughout the core. The low accretion rate models did not
have any regions where the ionization rate was above the
Milky Way value except at r<0.01 pc. Although we examine the impact of the accretion rate at both times, we
expect higher accretion on average in younger stars undergoing bursts of accretion. An important consequence

We computed the CR energy spectra as a function of
radius using Lc = 10−5 pc for different values of the
turbulent power σ 2 . Figure 12 shows the results at two
different radii for t = 0.3 Myr. Increasing the amount of
turbulence in the core from the fiducial value of σ 2 = 0.0
changes the shape of the spectrum and increases the
value of Eturn (r). This can be seen in both panels of
Figure 12, in which the values of Eturn (r) are plotted as
black points on each spectrum. The positive correlation
in the flux with higher turbulence at energies greater
than ≈ 500 MeV is caused by the increase in particle
scattering. At low energies, energy losses dominate over
scattering and more turbulence causes lower values of
the flux.
Figure 13 shows the average ionization rates for t =
0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr. For most of the values of
the turbulent power that we tested, there is a minimal change in the average ionization rates computed
throughout the core. While stronger turbulence increases scattering and thus the flux of higher energy
CRs, this contribution to the ionization rate is offset
by the larger energy losses that attenuate the lower en-

16

Fitz Axen et al.

Figure 9. Ionization rate as a function of radius for t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr. Blue lines show the average over all angular
bins computed at a given radius, and the averages for Ft > 0.01, Ft > 0.05, and Ft > 0.1 are shown in yellow, brown, and
red respectively. Maximum values of any angular bin at a given radius are shown by the green points. The gray line indicates
ζ = 10−16 s−1 , which is the measured ionization rate for the Milky Way.

Figure 10. Ionization rate for t = 0.3 Myr (top) and t = 0.5 Myr (bottom) computed in different regions of the grid at r = 0.01
pc, r = 0.05 pc, and r = 0.1 pc. The magnitude of the ionization rate is indicated by the size and color of the dots which each
represent a range of values, with larger darker colored dots indicating a higher ionization rate. Regions without any dots have
no ionization. Colorscale indicates the tracer fraction.

Protostellar CRs

17

Figure 11. Ionization rate as a function of radius for t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr for different input spectrum properties,
indicated in Table 2. Blue lines show the averages over all angular bins computed at a given radius, averages for Ft > 0.1
are shown in red, and the maximum values of any angular bin at a given radius are shown by the green points. Different
linestyles indicate the evolution of the ionization rate assuming different CR spectra injected at the protostar, with the solid
lines representing the highest initial spectra and the dash-dot lines representing the lowest initial spectra. The gray line indicates
ζ = 10−16 s−1 , which is the measured ionization rate for the Milky Way.

Figure 12. CR energy spectrum at t=0.3 Myr for r = 0.01 pc and r = 0.05 pc using Lc = 10−5 pc and four different values of
σ 2 . Black dashed lines show the attenuated spectrum at Rstart = 0.001 pc. Dashed red lines show the free streaming solution
at each radius. Black dots show Eturn (r), which is the energy at which the spectrum is a maximum.

18

Fitz Axen et al.

ergy CRs. For example, for t = 0.3 Myr, Figure 12
shows that there is a noticeable difference in the spectra
between σ 2 = 0.01 and σ 2 = 0.1, with σ 2 = 0.1 having
a higher value of Eturn (r) for both distances from the
core. However, the left panel of Figure 13 demonstrates
that the average ionization rates throughout the core for
the two cases are indistinguishable.
When there is a large enough amount of turbulence,
the increase in the flux at high energies can no longer
compensate for the energy losses at low energies and
the average ionization rate decreases. The left panel of
Figure 13 displays this behavior for σ 2 = 1.0, where the
value of the ionization rate for this case is lower at all
distances from the core than for the lower values of σ 2 .
This effect is sensitive to density, as is demonstrated by
the lack of this feature in the right panel of Figure 13.
The distribution of CRs becomes more isotropic as the
amount of turbulence increases. This is because increasing the amount of turbulence reduces the influence of the
bulk magnetic field, which introduces asymmetries by
funneling particles into regions with a strong bulk magnetic field component. Figure 14 shows the spatial distribution of ionization rates for t = 0.3 Myr at r = 0.05
pc for the four different values of σ 2 . This figure demonstrates that even a small amount of turbulence changes
the distribution of ionization rates; for σ 2 = 0.01 a
larger fraction of the domain experiences non-zero ionization than for σ 2 = 0.0. This effect is even more
pronounced for σ 2 = 0.1 (bottom left) and σ 2 = 1.0
(bottom right), where the entire grid at r = 0.05 pc
experiences a nonzero ionization rate.
As the ionization throughout the core becomes more
isotropic, the maximum ionization rate declines. For example, at t = 0.3 Myr, Figure 13 shows the maximum
ionization rates for σ 2 = 0.0 are orders of magnitude
higher than the maximum values for the nonzero values
of σ 2 . Increasing the amount of turbulence further decreases the maximum values, and the values for σ 2 = 1.0
are the lowest for the four values tested. Although turbulence increases the likelihood that a region of the core
will have some ionization, it decreases the chance of it
having a particularly large ionization.
Appendix B shows results of the same calculations using Lc = 10−4 pc. We find that using a larger correlation
length produces similar results.
4. DISCUSSION

4.1. Comparison With Observations
While the CR ionization rate from embedded protostars cannot be directly measured, the local ionization
rate can be indirectly constrained through observations
of the transition lines from various ions. Several re-

cent studies have used transition line measurements to
place constraints on the ionization rates from different
sources. In particular, N2 H+ and HCO+ emission have
been used to infer the ionization rates from the protocluster OMC-2 FIR-4 and the bow shock of the lowmass protostar L1157-mm, although these constraints
have considerable uncertainties (Gaches et al. 2019a).
OMC-2 FIR-4 is one of the closest known
intermediate-mass protoclusters and has been observed
in detail by the HIFI spectrometer aboard the Herschel
satellite (Ceccarelli et al. 2014). It is located within the
Orion Molecular Cloud (OMC) at a distance of 420 pc,
has a total mass of approximately 30 M , and a total
luminosity of 103 L (Kim et al. 2008; Crimier et al.
2009; López-Sepulcre et al. 2013). It contains three
protostellar sources of approximately 1-10 M each
(López-Sepulcre et al. 2013). Ceccarelli et al. (2014)
used measurements of N2 H+ and HCO+ emission towards OMC-2 FIR-4 to estimate the ionization rate in
the cluster. They assumed that most of the emission
comes from the central source and treated it using a
two-component model, with a warm inner region at
1250-3000 au (6.1 × 10−3 -1.5 × 10−2 pc) from the source
and a cold outer envelope at 3500-5000 au (1.7 × 10−2 2.4 × 10−2 pc). They found that the inner and outer regions were well fit by ionization rates of ≈ 6 × 10−12 s−1
and 4 × 10−14 s−1 respectively. Fontani et al. (2017)
confirmed the estimate of ζ ≈ 4 × 10−14 s−1 using measurements of HC3 N and HC5 N, and Favre et al. (2018)
measured the same value using c − C3 H2 .
As can be seen in Table 2, none of our models have an
accretion luminosity that is as high as that observed for
OMC-2 FIR-4. The highest luminosity model that we
have is the 'high' accretion rate model at t = 0.3 Myr,
which has a luminosity approximately ten times lower.
Given this discrepancy, we do not expect to measure
ionization rates as high as the observed value for OMC2 FIR-4. The left panel of Figure 11 shows that for
r ≈ 0.02 pc, the average ionization rate we measure
in the core was ≈ 2 × 10−17 s−1 , roughly two orders of
magnitude lower. Still, the measurements studied by
Ceccarelli et al. (2014) are not an azimuthal average
and depend on the direction of the telescope relative to
the outflow. The highest ionization rates we measure
at r ≈ 0.02 pc were ≈ 4 × 10−15 s−1 , only a factor of
ten lower than the Ceccarelli et al. (2014) observations.
Therefore, accounting for the luminosity difference, our
model is consistent with their results.
Another well studied source is the low mass Class 0
protostar L1157-mm, which has a luminosity of ≈ 4L
(Podio et al. 2014); approximately equal to the luminosities of our fiducial models. The star drives the pro-

Protostellar CRs

19

Figure 13. Average ionization rate as a function of radius for t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr using Lc = 10−5 pc. Turbulent
power is indicated by the shade of blue. Maximum values of any angular bin at a given radius are shown by the green points,
with larger dots symbolizing more turbulence. Dashed lines and translucent points at r > 0.05 pc indicate the region where
our results may be uncertain due to our simulation boundary conditions. The gray line indicates ζ = 10−16 s−1 , which is the
measured ionization rate for the Milky Way.

tostellar outflow L1157, which has a bright bow shock,
L1157-B1, located at a distance of ≈ 0.1 pc from the
protostar (Podio et al. 2014). Podio et al. (2014) used
emission measurements from L1157-B1 of N2 H+ , HCO+
and other molecules to constrain the value of the ionization rate in the shock. They computed an ionization rate
of ζ ≈ 3 × 10−16 s−1 . Figure 9 shows that CRs can be
directed into the outflow cavity, raising the average ionization rates in the outflow. Still, the maximum values
we measure for our fiducial models at r = 0.1 pc from
the star are ≈ 10−17 s−1 , an order of magnitude lower
than the Podio et al. (2014) results. However, Padovani
et al. (2016) showed that CRs can also be reaccelerated in the bow shocks of protostars, which may be a
contributing source of CR acceleration in the L1157-B1
shock. Therefore, we do not consider our results completely inconsistent with the Podio et al. (2014) results.
In addition to predicting the radial evolution of the
ionization rate, our models predict azimuthal variation,
especially with respect to the location of the outflow
cavity. Spatially resolved observations of molecular ions,
such as HCO+ and N2 H+ , which are sensitive to the CR
ionization rate may provide evidence of non-uniform CR
flux (Cleeves et al. 2015; Seifert et al. 2021). The distribution and abundance of complex organic molecules,
such as methanol (CH3 OH), acetaldehyde (CH3 CHO)
and methyl formate (HCOOCH3 ), which can be pro-

duced by CR heating of dust mantles (Ivlev et al. 2015;
Jiménez-Serra et al. 2016; López-Sepulcre, A. et al. 2017;
Harju et al. 2020) may also point to elevated and/or
anisotropic CR flux. However, obtaining high-resolution
maps of these tracers toward protostellar cores is challenging, even with ALMA. In addition, external sources
of ionization together with gas temperature and density variations may make it difficult to attribute any
observed variation to CR anisotropies.
Since observations constrain the total ionization rate,
it is also difficult to disentangle the relative contributions of X-rays and CRs to the ionization. Young stars
are strong X-ray emitters (e.g., Preibisch et al. 2005).
Hard X-ray photons produced through accretion and
stellar flares can provide a substantial source of ionization at intermediate densities (Glassgold et al. 1997;
Cleeves et al. 2015). However, the radiation spectrum
of protostellar sources, which have lower effective temperatures and larger radii than their T-Tauri counterparts (e.g., Hosokawa et al. 2011), are thought to have a
softer X-ray spectrum and produce less ionizating radiation (Skinner et al. 1997). Thus, we expect CRs are the
dominant source of ionization in dense core envelopes
and protostellar disks (Offner et al. 2019).
Many previous studies have only considered the effect
of CRs accelerated outside the molecular cloud on the
cloud gas. While our calculations suggest that the el-

20

Fitz Axen et al.

Figure 14. Ionization rate for t = 0.3 Myr using Lc = 10−5 pc computed in different regions of the grid at r = 0.05 pc for four
different values of σ 2 . The size and color of the dots indicates the magnitude of the ionization rate, with larger darker colored
dots representing a higher ionization rate. Regions without any dots have no ionization. Colorscale indicates the tracer fraction.

evated ionization rates observed in OMC-2 FIR-4 and
L1157-B1 could be produced by local protostellar CRs,
we note that a nearby supernova remnant (SNR) that
efficiently accelerates CRs may have the same effect.
SNRs are likely to be the main CR acceleration mechanism contributing to the Galactic CR (GCR) spectrum;
however, they are probably not the only one. SNR remnants are unlikely to be able to accelerate particles up
to PeV energies and cannot explain deviations observed
in the isotopic ratios of the GCR spectrum from solar
system values (Drury et al. 2001; Bykov et al. 2020).
While protostellar CRs do not explain these features,
our calculations are able to explain the elevated ionization rates without assuming SNR acceleration, as a
nearby SNR would likely produce other observational
signals.
4.2. Implications for the Chemistry of Protostellar
Cores and Molecular Clouds

Our results have implications for studies of the chemical abundances in protostellar cores and molecular
clouds. These studies solve chemical networks to determine the evolution of the core or cloud chemistry and
are used to link observations of the abundances to other
properties. Very few studies consider internal sources of
CR acceleration or even a spatially variable CR ionization rate (Gaches et al. 2019a).
Observations determining the abundances of deuterated molecules in protostellar cores are used to determine the core collapse history, which is important for
determining the dynamical mechanism of core formation
and evolution (Bacmann et al. 2003; Flower et al. 2006;
Caselli et al. 2008; Emprechtinger et al. 2009; Fontani
et al. 2011; Kong et al. 2015, 2016). The deuterium fracN2 H+
tion Dfrac
=[N2 D+ ]/[N2 H+ ] has been calculated using
transition line measurements for a number of protostellar cores, with typical values of ≈ 0.1 − 1, and used

21

Protostellar CRs
to place constraints on the ages of the cores (Crapsi
et al. 2005; Emprechtinger et al. 2009; Pagani et al. 2009,
2013; Kong et al. 2016). However, these studies showed
that variations in the value assumed for the CR ionization rate change the time evolution of the formation of
N2 H+
N2 D+ and the final equilibrium value of Dfrac
. Another observational indicator of the core age is the ratio
of ortho- to para- abundances of deuterated molecules
such as H2 D+ , but this also depends on the value assumed for the CR ionization rate (Caselli et al. 2008;
Brünken et al. 2014).
Several studies found variations in the core evolution when they varied the CR ionization rate from
≈ 10−18 − 10−15 s−1 (Crapsi et al. 2005; Pagani et al.
2009; Fontani et al. 2011; Pagani et al. 2013; Brünken
et al. 2014; Kong et al. 2015, 2016). Figures 9 and
11 show that the ionization rates throughout the core
are not uniform and span this range, with higher values in certain regions such as the outflow. This suggests
that the abundance depends on the viewing angle and
measuring a single value of the deuterium abundance
towards a protostellar core will not place a tight constraint on the age of the core. Additionally, some studies used observations of deuterium molecules to place
upper limits on ionization rates in cores. Kong et al.
(2015) concluded that to reproduce the deuterium abundance observations in typical cores an ionization rate of
ζ < 10−16 s−1 is needed. Figures 9 and 11 show that
there are regions of some protostellar cores with higher
ionization rates than this, which indicates that the deuterium fraction may vary throughout the core.
Similar methods are used to determine how the CR
ionization rate impacts the formation of neutral organic molecules in cores. Shingledecker et al. (2018)
calculated the abundances of HOCO, NO2 , HC2 O, and
HCOOCH3 in a protostellar core, varying the ionization
rate between 10−17 and 10−14 s−1 . They found an anticorrelation between CR ionization rate and neutral organic molecule abundance as the gas became dominated
by ions. Figure 9 shows that because of the heterogeneous distribution of ionization rates in the core, the
maximum ionization rates throughout most of the core
fall in the range ζ > 10−17 s−1 . This suggests that some
regions of protostellar cores have reduced abundances of
neutral organic molecules.
In molecular clouds, the ionization rate affects the
abundances of CO and CI, which are used to estimate the mass of H2 gas in the cloud (Papadopoulos
et al. 2004; Bolatto et al. 2013; Bisbas et al. 2015).
In order to use these transition lines as mass estimators, the relative abundances of [CO]/[H2 ] or [CI]/[H2 ]
must be known. Numerical studies have calculated how

these abundance ratios are affected by different values
of the CR ionization rate in molecular clouds; however,
they mostly assumed a constant CR ionization rate of
10−17 s−1 throughout the cloud and examined the effect of varying it (Glover & Clark 2012; Offner et al.
2013, 2014; Glover et al. 2015; Glover & Clark 2016;
Bisbas et al. 2017). An increase in the CR ionization
rate causes a decrease in the abundance of CO and an
increase in the abundance of CI, and at ionization rates
2-3 orders of magnitude greater than 10−17 s−1 CO is
almost completely depleted and CI is the dominant gas
tracer (Glover & Clark 2012; Bisbas et al. 2017; Gaches
et al. 2019b).
Gaches et al. (2019a,b) found that including internal sources of CR acceleration from protostellar accretion shocks accurately reproduced the observed ionization rates and abundances of [CO]/[H2 ] and [CI]/[H2 ] in
molecular clouds. Figures 9 and 11 show that in regions
of cores near the outflow and throughout the core in
higher accretion sources the CR ionization rate is comparable to the value frequently assumed in the literature
of 10−17 s−1 . Consequently, protostellar sources of CR
acceleration will impact the abundances of CO and CI
near the sources in molecular clouds. Studies using more
realistic cloud morphologies and star formation distributions will calculate more accurate ionization rates in the
clouds.
Finally, we note that the CR flux in molecular clouds
also affects the cloud temperature, as some of the CR
energy goes into heating the gas. Consequently, clouds
with significant CR ionization are also warmer by ≈ 3050 K (Bisbas et al. 2017; Gaches & Offner 2018). Higher
temperatures increase the thermal pressure of the gas,
which may inhibit star formation (McKee & Ostriker
2007).
4.3. Comparison With Prior Models
Several studies have used analytical models to predict
the CR ionization rate in protostellar cores. Gaches &
Offner (2018) calculated the CR attenuation and resulting ionization rates in protostellar cores using a simple
radial density profile. They calculated the ionization
for free streaming propagation, i.e. assuming the CRs
are not coupled to a magnetic field, and for diffusive CR
propagation, which corresponds to a turbulent magnetic
field. Their fiducial model considered a 0.5 M star and
accretion rate of ≈ 1.4 × 10−5 M /yr (see their Equation 4), which is similar to our MP45 0.3 High model.
The Offner & Chaban (2017) simulations we use as inputs assume an initially uniform field in the z direction, which imposes a degree of order even with the gas
turbulence, so free streaming is a reasonable approxi-

22

Fitz Axen et al.

mation for our calculations with σ 2 = 0.0. For this
model they computed ζ ≈ 10−14 s−1 at N ≈ 1021 cm−2 ,
which drops to ζ ≈ 10−19 s−1 at the edge of the core
where N ≈ 1023 cm−2 (see their Figure 11). As can be
seen in Figure 11, the average values we measure are
between ≈ 10−19 s−1 and 10−16 s−1 , so our results are
roughly consistent with those computed by Gaches &
Offner (2018). However, Figure 11 also demonstrates
that the CR ionization rate can vary substantially at
a given radius and column density when asymmetries
due to the magnetic field, gas structure and outflow are
considered.
Silsbee & Ivlev (2019) derived analytical solutions for
the attenuation of the CR ionization rate including energy losses as a function of effective column density.
Their solutions assume a bulk magnetic field B0 (x) and
a turbulent magnetic field δB(x). The inputs of their
model include the properties of the initial CR spectrum
and loss function. Appendix C.2 provides further details of their model, modified to account for the spherical geometry of our problem. We compare their analytic
model to our Monte Carlo calculations. We compute the
average radial density profile for both of our grids and
derive what the Silsbee & Ivlev (2019) solutions for the
ionization rate would be given our initial spectra. We
also perform calculations using this radially averaged
density, which should give the same results. We expect
these curves to be similar, but not necessarily equal to,
the average ionization rates we compute for our grids
shown by the curves in Figure 9.
Figure 15 shows the results of this test. As can be
seen, the solutions are within a factor of a few of each
other. However, the green points demonstrate that at
each radius we compute a wide range of ionization rate
values that are not captured by the Silsbee & Ivlev
(2019) model or by other studies which take a radial
density profile. The ranges of ionization rates that we
compute at each radius, shown by the green shading,
are all greater than five orders of magnitude. This test
shows that, while our calculations give similar average
results as other models, they provide a more nuanced
view of the ionization rates in different regions around
the star.
4.4. Caveats
Our simulations make some approximations that may
impact our results. For one thing, the properties of the
protostellar disk are not resolved. To account for CR
energy losses in the innermost regions of the core, we
use the maximum resolution grid with ∆xAMR = 26 au
to compute the radial attenuation of the CR spectrum
out to Rstart = 0.001 pc. This resolution does not re-

solve the circumstellar disk density and magnetic field.
CR propagation in the disk may cause a non-radially
symmetric CR spectrum at Rstart , with lower fluxes of
CRs in regions near the disk due to energy losses inside
the disk (Offner et al. 2019). This could affect the angular distribution of ionization rates shown in Figure 10,
especially at smaller radii, and cause lower ionization
rates throughout the core.
As discussed in Section 2.2.2, our treatment of the
two component magnetic field is less accurate than resolving the turbulence as some other studies do (e.g.,
Giacalone & Jokipii 1999; Fraschetti et al. 2018). Our
method is less computationally expensive, but it is an
approximation of the behavior of particles in the presence of magnetic fields. Using the path length to sample
the particle step size is a reasonable approximation over
solving the full Lorentz equation, as the gyroradius is
orders of magnitude smaller than the path length; however, by not resolving the turbulence, we are forced to
choose the direction of travel statistically. Figures 12,
13, and 14 show the qualitative effects that low and high
amounts of turbulence can have on particle propagation
and ionization throughout the core. Furthermore, as described in Appendix C, our code reproduces the correct
solution in the free streaming and diffusion limits. Further studies are needed will show how well the quantitative results approximate the full numerical treatment.
Additionally, our treatment of turbulence only accounts for spatial diffusion of the CRs. Momentum diffusion is included in many CR propagation codes and
causes CR reacceleration (Strong & Moskalenko 1998).
If the gas is strongly supersonic (Ms >> 1) and superAlfvénic (MA >> 1) then it may be able to reaccelerate
CRs significantly to relativistic energies. For both of
our grids the radially averaged values of the sonic and
Alfvénic Mach numbers had upper limits of Ms < 2 and
MA < 0.7 for r > 0.02 pc respectively, and less then
10 % of the gas in the core was both supersonic and
super-Alfvénic. Therefore, we do not expect there to be
efficient reacceleration of CRs in most of the core.
Our model also does not account for the effects of CR
energy deposition, which may modify the turbulence in
the gas. To examine how this would impact the outcome of the gas in the orion calculations, we computed
the radially averaged CR energy density and gas kinetic
energy density throughout the core. We found that
KE /CR ≈ 10 − 105 , which indicates that the energy
budget of the CRs is not high enough to significantly alter the outcome of the gas. However, it is large enough
to damp out the smallest scales of the turbulent energy,
which may develop at lower scales than the resolution
of the Offner & Chaban (2017) simulations. Assuming

23

Protostellar CRs

Figure 15. Average ionization rate as a function of radius for t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr. Dark blue curves use the densities
in our grids. Light blue curves show numerical results using the radially averaged density profile in each grid. Black curves
show the Silsbee & Ivlev (2019) model solutions using this density profile and our input loss function and CR spectra. Green
points show the maximum and minimum values of any angular bin at a given radius.

that the turbulence roughly follows a Kolmogorov power
spectrum (KE (k) ∝ k −5/3 ) with a numerical viscosity
that is roughly the size of a grid cell, the CR energy
would damp the turbulent energy at ≈ 1/100th of the
cell length. This provides reassurance that the viscosity
set by the grid scale of the MHD simulations is only a
couple orders of magnitude higher than the true viscosity set by CRs, and small scale turbulence is unlikely to
significantly alter the evolution of the magnetic field in
the MHD simulations.
Additionally, our code assumes time independence.
Under this assumption, the initial CR spectrum at the
accretion shock is the same for all times, and the speed
at which the particles of different energies propagate
does not effect our results. Clearly, this assumption is
not true, as protostars undergo changes in their mass,
radius, and accretion rate, which affect the initial CR
spectrum. However, the timescales for CR propagation
are much less than that for accretion. The time for a
particle traveling at speed c/100−c to cross a grid cell of
0.001 pc is ≈ 0.003 − 0.3 years, or ≈ 1-100 days. While
small flickering in the accretion rate can occur on the
timescales of days, episodic accretion is characterized by
variations that occur on timescales of months to years
(Audard et al. 2014). This timescale is also less than the
dynamical timescale of the gas to cross one cell, which
is approximately a year. Therefore time independence
is a reasonable assumption for our calculations.

Finally, our results are limited by the boundary conditions we impose for our grid. We discuss this further
in Appendix A.1.
5. CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we use a Monte Carlo cosmic ray transport code to investigate the propagation of cosmic rays
accelerated by protostellar accretion shocks in protostellar cores. In order to account for realistic physical
asymmetries, we post-process simulations of turbulent,
magnetized protostellar cores, which include protostellar outflows. The turbulence is modeled using a statistical method that samples the particle travel direction and step size as a function of the turbulent power,
parametrized by σ 2 = (δB/B0 )2 . We calculate the ionization rate as a function of both radius and solid angle
around the star. We explore the effect of varying the accretion properties and amount of turbulence in the core
on the CR propagation and resulting ionization rates.
The CR flux is non-uniform when there is negligible
sub-grid turbulence in the core and is focused in the direction of the outflow, which is similar to the 'flashlight'
effect observed for photons (Yorke & Sonnhalter 2002;
Cunningham et al. 2011). This creates elevated CR ionization rates in the outflow region. We find that at a
given distance from the star the average ionization rate
in the outflow can be up to an order of magnitude higher
than the ionization rate averaged over all angular bins at

24

Fitz Axen et al.

that radius. The maximum ionization rates calculated
at a given radius can be up to two orders of magnitude
or higher than the average at that radius.
Our results are sensitive to the accretion rate and
other stellar parameters. A two order of magnitude
range in the accretion rate causes differences in the ionization rates in the core by up to two orders of magnitude. In contrast to the stellar parameters, varying
σ 2 by two orders of magnitude increases the uniformity
of the CR distribution and changes the shape of the
spectrum but does not have a significant effect on the
resulting ionization rates. The increased scattering of
the CR particles with higher turbulence enhances the
flux at high energies and decreases it at low energies,
offsetting the net impact on the ionization rate.

For our fiducial calculations, the radially averaged ionization rates throughout the core are not as high as the
measured value for the Milky Way of ζ ≈ 10−16 s−1 ,
due to attenuation by the dense gas. However, within
r ∼ 0.04 pc, the maximum ionization rates exceed the
measured Milky Way value. Throughout most of the
core, the maximum ionization rates exceed 10−17 s−1 ,
which is the value often assumed in astrochemistry studies.
In summary, our calculations suggest protostellar
cores with low levels of turbulence have non-uniform CR
fluxes that produce a broad range of ionization rates.
This has important implications for the chemistry of
molecular clouds, protostellar cores, and accretion disks.
We conclude that accurate models of CR propagation
must take into account the geometry of the magnetic
field and gas density.

APPENDIX

A. RESOLUTION LIMITATIONS

A.1. Grid Boundary Conditions
Our results are limited by the boundary conditions we impose for our grid. In this section we investigate the impact
of the domain size on our results. Figures 13 and 17 show the CR ionization rate out to 0.1 pc (roughly the size of the
core); however, this distance is close to the edge of the grid, so we stop tracking CR propagation once the CRs reach
this radius. Consequently, they cannot scatter back and increase the ionization as they would if the grid were much
larger. We can use results calculated at a smaller radius to evaluate how accurate our results are with this caveat.
For each value of σ 2 and Lc = 10−5 pc, we compute the ionization rate out to rtest = 0.025 pc with three different
values for the maximum radius of propagation rbound . We test rbound = rtest = 0.025 pc, rbound = 2rtest = 0.05 pc,
and rbound = 4rtest = 0.1 pc. The tests with rbound = rtest are analogous to the results we present in Figures 9 and
13, while the other two calculations offer insights into how the chosen grid boundary impacts the ionization rates.
Figure 16 shows the results for σ 2 = 0.01 and σ 2 = 1.0. For each value of σ 2 the curves are within a factor of a few
of each other out to r ≈ rtest /2 = 0.0125 pc. Past this radius, the curves with rbound = rtest start to decline further,
but the discrepancy is still less than an order of magnitude at r ≈ 4/5rtest = 0.02 pc. From these results, we conclude
that the results in Figures 13 and 17 are accurate to within a factor of a few out to r = 0.05 pc, and we plot our
results at r <= 0.05 pc using solid lines. For r >= 0.05 pc we use dashed lines to indicate regions where scattering
may increase the ionization rates and the curve represents a lower limit.
A.2. Number of Particles
Statistical counting errors are inherent in Monte Carlo methods. In our fiducial runs with σ 2 = 0.0, this effect is
negligible because there is only random sampling for the initial particle directions, and the rest of the particles' motion
is dictated by the bulk magnetic field. For σ 2 > 0.0, sampling the particle direction and step size creates a source of
statistical noise that may effect our results for the particle flux and ionization rates around the star.
For each of our simulations we use NP E = 103 particles starting in each energy bin, which gives a total particle count
of N = 5 × 104 particles. Here, we demonstrate that this is enough particles to achieve convergence in our results for
the ionization rate in different regions of the core. We analyze our results for t = 0.3 Myr using σ 2 = 0 and Lc = 10−5
pc, our highest turbulence run, using different values of NP E . We define the relative error in the ionization rate as
δζ2000 (NP E ) = |ζ(NP E ) − ζ2000 |/ζ2000 where ζ2000 is the ionization rate for NP E = 2 × 103 particles. We calculate this
quantity for the average ionization rate in the outflow and the maximum ionization rates computed over the whole
grid, as these quantities have fewer particle counts and consequently are more sensitive to changes in NP E than the
radial average ionization rate.

Protostellar CRs

25

Figure 16. Left: Ionization rate for three different values of rbound , using Lc = 10−5 pc at t = 0.3 Myr. Right: Relative error
in the outflow and maximum ionization rates, where the reference value is NP E = 2 × 103 particles. The model adopts the
simulation at t = 0.3 Myr, using Lc = 10−5 pc, and σ 2 = 1.0.

The right panel of 16 shows our results. As can be seen, the average ionization rates computed in the outflow region
are not very sensitive to NP E . All values of ζ(NP E ) tested have an uncertainty in the outflow ionization rate of less
than 100 % throughout the core, and ζ(103 ) has an uncertainty of less than 50 % throughout the core. Computing an
ionization rate in a single angular bin, such as for the maximum ionization rates shown by the green points, have a
higher uncertainty. This is in part a function of how many solid angle bins we use, and the uncertainty would be lower
if we use fewer bins. For our grid, δζ(103 ) ≈ 1 at the edge of the core, corresponding to a factor of two discrepancy.
All the same, given the magnitude of the uncertainties in our setup, this is a minor effect.
B. IMPACT OF THE CORRELATION LENGTH

In this section, we explore the impact of the value of the correlation length on our results. As discussed in Section
2.3.3, the value of the correlation length of turbulence in molecular clouds is uncertain, but the limitations of our
sampling require that we test parameters that give path lengths roughly the size of a grid cell or smaller. For the
simulations presented in Figure 13 we test Lc = 10−5 pc, which fits this criteria for our particle energy range. We
also run our simulations for Lc = 10−4 pc, which produces path lengths that approach the cell size but is still small
enough to give accurate results.
Figure 17 shows the average ionization rates at t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr for different values of the turbulent power
σ 2 using Lc = 10−4 pc. The ionization rates have the same features as most curves in Figure 13 show- increasing
σ 2 decreases the maximum ionization rate computed at each radius, but has little effect on the radially averaged
ionization rates compared to σ 2 = 0. This makes intuitive sense when considering Equation 16; a larger correlation
length decreases the effect of the turbulence, meaning that we would expect even less change for these simulation runs
from the σ 2 = 0 case than is shown in Figure 13.
If we tested our simulations with a small enough value of the correlation length, our results would show similar
features to the σ 2 = 1 curve in the left panel of Figure 13 because of the increase in turbulence. However, because of
the computational expense of such a calculation, we leave this for another study.
C. ANALYTICAL SOLUTION TESTS

Many CR propagation codes treat the propagation of CR particles as being either completely free streaming or
completely turbulent. To test these limits, we modify the way the particles chose the direction of their next step.

26

Fitz Axen et al.

Figure 17. Average ionization rate as a function of radius for t = 0.3 Myr and t = 0.5 Myr using Lc = 10−4 pc. Turbulent
power is indicated by the shade of blue. Maximum values of any angular bin at a given radius are shown by the green points,
with larger dots symbolizing more turbulence. Dashed lines and translucent points at r > 0.05 pc indicate the region where
our results may be uncertain due to our simulation boundary conditions. The gray line indicates ζ = 10−16 s−1 , which is the
measured ionization rate for the Milky Way.

For the free streaming tests, all direction changes are turned off, so that the particles propagate away from the star
following their initial velocity direction. For the diffusion tests, we set the particles to always sample their direction
randomly, rather than sometimes following the direction of the bulk magnetic field. To set the value of λsc , we test
σ 2 = 0.01, σ 2 = 0.1 and σ 2 = 1.0 using Lc = 10−5 pc and B0 (x) = 100μG in every cell. Even though we set a uniform
value of B0 (x) in every cell in order to obtain a nonzero value of λsc , the direction of it is irrelevant for these tests
and thus its implementation differs from our normal grid setup.
We test each case using NP E = 103 particles. The solutions for the attenuation are simple and can be derived
analytically if particle energy losses are turned off. We test this scenario first. To benchmark our calculations with a
model that includes energy losses, we use the model developed by Silsbee & Ivlev (2019).
C.1. Solutions Without Energy Losses
The simplest tests we perform are for free streaming and diffusive transport where we do not allow the particles to
lose energy. As is described in Section 3.2, in these limits the attenuation of the CR flux with radius can be derived
analytically and follows a power law, j(E, r) ∝ jin (E)r−γ . The values of γ are γf,r = 2 and γd,r = 1 for free streaming
and diffusion respectively. Since the flux is uniformly attenuated at all energies, the ionization rate is also attenuated
radially by r−2 and r−1 for free streaming and diffusion. For these tests we compute the particle trajectories only out
to r = 10−4 pc, because the diffusion tests are computationally expensive with a small value of λsc . For each case, we
compute the radial ionization rate following Equation 20. The left panel of Figure 18 shows that our code correctly
reproduces the analytic solution in these limits.
C.2. Solutions With Energy Losses
We also compare the results of our code in the free streaming and diffusive limits to the model presented in Silsbee
& Ivlev (2019), modified to account for the spherical geometry of this test problem. For these tests, we compare our
results to exact solutions for the free streaming and diffusive ionization rates. The models take as inputs a power-law
exponent of the initial CR spectrum, a, and a power-law exponent of the energy loss function, b. As discussed in
Section 2.3, the power-law exponent for our initial CR spectrum is a = 1.9. We use the same loss function as Silsbee &

27

Protostellar CRs

Figure 18. Left: Ionization rate for free streaming and diffusion with no energy losses. Dashed lines show comparisons to
γf,r = 2 and γd,r = 1, which are the analytic solutions for CR attenuation in these limits. Right: Relative error in the ionization
rate, δζ = |ζN − ζA |/ζA , for free streaming and diffusion with energy losses, where ζA is to the analytic model developed by
Silsbee & Ivlev (2019).

Ivlev (2019), which follows b = 0.82 in the energy range that is important for ionization (≈ 0.1 MeV- 1 GeV) (Padovani
et al. 2018).
The solutions for the attenuation of the ionization rate with column density are functions of the column density
N . In order to compare to the analytical solutions, we adopt a uniform density of n(H2 ) = 107 cm−3 . In this case,
N (r) = n(H2 )r. The solution for the ionization rate for free streaming propagation is given by
1 (1 + 2b) j0 L0 E0 If
ζfs (r) =
4πr2 (a + 2b)




n(H2 )r
N0f

−( a+b−1
1+b )
,

(C1)

E0
where  = 37 eV, If ≈ 1.07/(a + b − 1) + 0.42, and N0f = L0 (1+d)
. We choose a reference value of E0 = 1 MeV, and
j0 and L0 are the values of the initial CR spectrum and loss function at E0 . The solution for the ionization rate for
diffusive propagation is also a function of the power of the turbulence σ 2 . It is given by

1
ζdiff (σ , r) =
n(H2 )
2

Z

Emax

E=0

Z

Emax

E 0 =E



1
0α
(4πK(E − E α ))3/2




j0

E0
E0

−a


exp

−r2
4K(E 0α − E α )



dEdE 0 ,

(C2)

where α = 7/6 + b for a Kolmogorov spectrum, and
(1−α)

K=

D0 E0
,
αn(H2 )v0 L0

(C3)

where D0 = λsc (E0 )v0 /3 is the diffusion coefficient at E0 .
For these tests, we propagate the particles out to Rcore = 0.01 pc and compute the radial ionization rate. The right
panel of Figure 18 shows the relative error in the ionization rate as defined δζ = |ζN − ζA |/ζA , where ζN and ζA are
the numerical solution and the analytic solution, respectively. All values of ζN have a relative error of less than 75%
throughout the core for all values of σ 2 . Given the orders of magnitude involved in our calculations throughout this
study, we consider our results in good agreement with the analytic solution.

28

Fitz Axen et al.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the US Department of Energy through the Los Alamos National Laboratory. Los Alamos
National Laboratory is operated by Triad National Security, LLC, for the National Nuclear Security Administration of
U.S. Department of Energy (Contract No. 89233218CNA000001) This research was supported in part by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. NSF PHY-1748958 and by NASA ATP grant 80NSSC20K0507. This material
is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific
Computing Research, Department of Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship under Award Number DESC0021110. We thank an anonymous referee for helpful comments that improved the manuscript.

REFERENCES
Ainsworth, R. E., Scaife, A. M. M., Ray, T. P., et al. 2014,
ApJL, 792, L18
Amato, E. 2014, International Journal of Modern Physics
D, 23, 1430013
Anglada, G., Rodrı́guez, L. F., & Carrasco-González, C.
2018, Astronomy and Astrophysics Review, 26, 3
Artigau, É., Kouach, D., Donati, J.-F., et al. 2014, in
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9147, Ground-based and
Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy V, ed. S. K.
Ramsay, I. S. McLean, & H. Takami, 914715
Audard, M., Ábrahám, P., Dunham, M. M., et al. 2014, in
Protostars and Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther, R. S. Klessen,
C. P. Dullemond, & T. Henning, 387
Bacmann, A., Lefloch, B., Ceccarelli, C., et al. 2003, ApJL,
585, L55
Bai, X.-N. 2016, ApJ, 821, 80
Bai, X.-N., Ostriker, E. C., Plotnikov, I., & Stone, J. M.
2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 876, 60.
https://doi.org/10.3847%2F1538-4357%2Fab1648
Balbus, S. A., & Hawley, J. F. 1991, ApJ, 376, 214
Bally, J. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 491
Berezhko, E. G. 2008, The Astrophysical Journal Letters,
684, L69
Bisbas, T. G., Papadopoulos, P. P., & Viti, S. 2015, ApJ,
803, 37
Bisbas, T. G., van Dishoeck, E. F., Papadopoulos, P. P.,
et al. 2017, ApJ, 839, 90
Bolatto, A. D., Wolfire, M., & Leroy, A. K. 2013, ARA&A,
51, 207
Brünken, S., Sipilä, O., Chambers, E. T., et al. 2014,
Nature, 516, 219
Bykov, A. M., Marcowith, A., Amato, E., et al. 2020,
SSRv, 216, 42
Caselli, P., Vastel, C., Ceccarelli, C., et al. 2008, A&A, 492,
703
Ceccarelli, C., Dominik, C., López-Sepulcre, A., et al. 2014,
The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 790, L1

Cleeves, L. I., Bergin, E. A., Qi, C., Adams, F. C., &
Öberg, K. I. 2015, ApJ, 799, 204
Crapsi, A., Caselli, P., Walmsley, C. M., et al. 2005, ApJ,
619, 379
Crimier, N., Ceccarelli, C., Lefloch, B., & Faure, A. 2009,
A&A, 506, 1229
Cunningham, A. J., Klein, R. I., Krumholz, M. R., &
McKee, C. F. 2011, ApJ, 740, 107
Dalgarno, A. 2006, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, 103, 12269
Donati, J. F., Bouvier, J., Walter, F. M., et al. 2011,
MNRAS, 412, 2454
Drury, L. O. 1983, Reports on Progress in Physics, 46, 973
Drury, L. O., Ellison, D. E., Aharonian, F. A., et al. 2001,
SSRv, 99, 329
Dutrey, A., Semenov, D., Chapillon, E., et al. 2014, in
Protostars and Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther, R. S. Klessen,
C. P. Dullemond, & T. Henning, 317
Emprechtinger, M., Caselli, P., Volgenau, N. H., Stutzki, J.,
& Wiedner, M. C. 2009, A&A, 493, 89
Fatuzzo, M., & Adams, F. C. 2014, ApJ, 787, 26
Favre, C., Ceccarelli, C., López-Sepulcre, A., et al. 2018,
The Astrophysical Journal, 859, 136
Fiedler, R. A., & Mouschovias, T. C. 1993, The
Astrophysical Journal, 415, 680
Fitz Axen, M., Speicher, J., Hungerford, A., & Fryer, C. L.
2021, MNRAS, 500, 3497
Flower, D. R., Pineau Des Forêts, G., & Walmsley, C. M.
2006, A&A, 449, 621
Fontani, F., Palau, A., Caselli, P., et al. 2011, A&A, 529, L7
Fontani, F., Ceccarelli, C., Favre, C., et al. 2017, A&A, 605,
A57
Fraschetti, F., Drake, J. J., Cohen, O., & Garraffo, C. 2018,
ApJ, 853, 112
Fryer, C. L., Liu, S., Rockefeller, G., Hungerford, A., &
Belanger, G. 2007, ApJ, 659, 389
Gaches, B. A. L., & Offner, S. S. R. 2018, ApJ, 861, 87

Protostellar CRs
Gaches, B. A. L., Offner, S. S. R., & Bisbas, T. G. 2019a,
ApJ, 878, 105
-. 2019b, ApJ, 883, 190
Gaches, B. A. L., Walch, S., Offner, S. S. R., & Münker, C.
2020, ApJ, 898, 79
Gammie, C. F. 1996, ApJ, 457, 355
Giacalone, J., & Jokipii, J. R. 1999, ApJ, 520, 204
Girart, J. M., Rao, R., & Marrone, D. P. 2006, Science,
313, 812
Glassgold, A. E., Najita, J., & Igea, J. 1997, ApJ, 480, 344
Glover, S. C. O., & Clark, P. C. 2012, MNRAS, 426, 377
-. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 3596
Glover, S. C. O., Clark, P. C., Micic, M., & Molina, F.
2015, MNRAS, 448, 1607
Harding, J. P., Fryer, C. L., & Mendel, S. 2016, ApJ, 822,
102
Harju, J., Pineda, J. E., Vasyunin, A. I., et al. 2020, ApJ,
895, 101
Hartmann, L., Herczeg, G., & Calvet, N. 2016, ARA&A,
54, 135
Hosokawa, T., Offner, S. S. R., & Krumholz, M. R. 2011,
ApJ, 738, 140
Houde, M., Hull, C. L. H., Plambeck, R. L., Vaillancourt,
J. E., & Hildebrand, R. H. 2016, ApJ, 820, 38
Houde, M., Rao, R., Vaillancourt, J. E., & Hildebrand,
R. H. 2011, ApJ, 733, 109
Houde, M., Vaillancourt, J. E., Hildebrand, R. H.,
Chitsazzadeh, S., & Kirby, L. 2009, ApJ, 706, 1504
Indriolo, N., & McCall, B. J. 2012, ApJ, 745, 91
Indriolo, N., Neufeld, D. A., Gerin, M., et al. 2015, The
Astrophysical Journal, 800, 40
Ivlev, A. V., Röcker, T. B., Vasyunin, A., & Caselli, P.
2015, ApJ, 805, 59
Jiménez-Serra, I., Vasyunin, A. I., Caselli, P., et al. 2016,
ApJL, 830, L6
Johns-Krull, C. M. 2007, ApJ, 664, 975
Johnstone, C. P., Jardine, M., Gregory, S. G., Donati,
J. F., & Hussain, G. 2014, MNRAS, 437, 3202
Kim, M. K., Hirota, T., Honma, M., et al. 2008, PASJ, 60,
991
Kirk, H., Friesen, R. K., Pineda, J. E., et al. 2017, ApJ,
846, 144
Kong, S., Caselli, P., Tan, J. C., Wakelam, V., & Sipilä, O.
2015, ApJ, 804, 98
Kong, S., Tan, J. C., Caselli, P., et al. 2016, ApJ, 821, 94

29

Krumholz, M. R., McKee, C. F., & Klein, R. I. 2004, in
Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series,
Vol. 323, Star Formation in the Interstellar Medium: In
Honor of David Hollenbach, ed. D. Johnstone, F. C.
Adams, D. N. C. Lin, D. A. Neufeeld, & E. C. Ostriker,
401
Lee, J. W. Y., Hull, C. L. H., & Offner, S. S. R. 2017, ApJ,
834, 201
Li, P. S., Martin, D. F., Klein, R. I., & McKee, C. F. 2012,
ApJ, 745, 139
López-Sepulcre, A., Taquet, V., Sánchez-Monge, Á., et al.
2013, A&A, 556, A62
López-Sepulcre, A., Sakai, N., Neri, R., et al. 2017, A&A,
606, A121.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201630334
McKee, C. F., & Ostriker, E. C. 2007, ARA&A, 45, 565
Morlino, G. 2017, High-Energy Cosmic Rays from
Supernovae, ed. A. W. Alsabti & P. Murdin, 1711
Morlino, G., & Gabici, S. 2015, MNRAS, 451, L100
Myers, P. C., Fuller, G. A., Goodman, A. A., & Benson,
P. J. 1991, ApJ, 376, 561
Nutter, D., & Ward-Thompson, D. 2007, MNRAS, 374,
1413
Offner, S. S. R., Bisbas, T. G., Bell, T. A., & Viti, S. 2014,
MNRAS, 440, L81
Offner, S. S. R., Bisbas, T. G., Viti, S., & Bell, T. A. 2013,
ApJ, 770, 49
Offner, S. S. R., & Chaban, J. 2017, ApJ, 847, 104
Offner, S. S. R., Gaches, B. A. L., & Holdship, J. R. 2019,
ApJ, 883, 121
Offner, S. S. R., Klein, R. I., McKee, C. F., & Krumholz,
M. R. 2009, ApJ, 703, 131
Padovani, M., Galli, D., & Glassgold, A. E. 2009, A&A,
501, 619
Padovani, M., Hennebelle, P., Marcowith, A., & Ferrière, K.
2015, A&A, 582, L13
Padovani, M., Ivlev, A. V., Galli, D., & Caselli, P. 2018,
A&A, 614, A111
Padovani, M., Marcowith, A., Hennebelle, P., & Ferrière, K.
2016, A&A, 590, A8
Padovani, M., Marcowith, A., Sánchez-Monge, Á., Meng,
F., & Schilke, P. 2019, A&A, 630, A72
Padovani, M., Ivlev, A. V., Galli, D., et al. 2020, SSRv,
216, 29
Pagani, L., Lesaffre, P., Jorfi, M., et al. 2013, A&A, 551,
A38
Pagani, L., Vastel, C., Hugo, E., et al. 2009, A&A, 494, 623
Papadopoulos, P. P., Thi, W. F., & Viti, S. 2004, MNRAS,
351, 147

30

Fitz Axen et al.

Pineda, J. E., Schmiedeke, A., Caselli, P., et al. 2020, ApJ,
submitted
Podio, L., Lefloch, B., Ceccarelli, C., Codella, C., &
Bachiller, R. 2014, A&A, 565, A64
Preibisch, T., Kim, Y.-C., Favata, F., et al. 2005, ApJS,
160, 401
Rodgers-Lee, D., Taylor, A. M., Ray, T. P., & Downes,
T. P. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 26
Rodrı́guez-Kamenetzky, A., Carrasco-González, C., Araudo,
A., et al. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 851, 16
Rudd, M. E. 1991, PhRvA, 44, 1644
Rudd, M. E., Kim, Y. K., Madison, D. H., & Gallagher,
J. W. 1985, Reviews of Modern Physics, 57, 965

Sanna, A., Moscadelli, L., Goddi, C., et al. 2019,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 623, L3
Seifert, R. A., Ilsedore. Cleeves, L., Adams, F. C., & Li,
Z.-Y. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2103.10971
Shingledecker, C. N., Tennis, J., Le Gal, R., & Herbst, E.
2018, ApJ, 861, 20
Silsbee, K., & Ivlev, A. V. 2019, ApJ, 879, 14
Silsbee, K., Ivlev, A. V., Padovani, M., & Caselli, P. 2018,
ApJ, 863, 188
Skinner, S. L., Guedel, M., Koyama, K., & Yamauchi, S.
1997, ApJ, 486, 886
Strong, A. W., & Moskalenko, I. V. 1998, ApJ, 509, 212
Thomas, T., & Pfrommer, C. 2019, MNRAS, 485, 2977
Wakelam, V., Herbst, E., Loison, J. C., et al. 2012, The
Astrophysical Journal, Supplement, 199, 21
Yorke, H. W., & Sonnhalter, C. 2002, ApJ, 569, 846

