In-situ Thermal Transport Measurement of Flowing Fluid using Modulated Photothermal
Radiometry
Jian Zeng1*, Ka Man Chung2*, Sarath Reddy Adapa1, Tianshi Feng1, Renkun Chen#1,2
1

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,

California 92093, United States
2

Program of Material Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California

92093, United States
*

These authors contributed equally.

#

Corresponding author: rkchen@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In situ thermal transport measurement of flowing fluid could be useful for the characterization and
diagnosis of practical thermal systems such as fluid heat exchangers and thermal energy storage systems.
Despite abundant reports on the ex-situ thermal conductivity measurement of stagnant fluids, a suitable
technique for the thermal conductivity measurement of flowing fluid has been rarely reported. This paper
presents the thermal conductivity measurement of flowing fluid within a pipe using a non-contact
modulated photothermal radiometry (MPR) technique, where the surface of the pipe is heated by an
intensity-modulated laser and the heat diffuses into the fluid with suitable modulation frequency. We design
a tube section with small wall thickness suitable for the MPR measurements to maximize the sensitivity of
the thermal response to the fluid properties while minimizing the lateral heat spreading effect. Intrinsic
thermal conductivity of different fluids was obtained within a proper range of frequency and flow velocity
where the forced convection effect is negligible. The forced convection effect became prominent at high
flowing velocity and at low modulation frequency, leading to overestimated thermal conductivity of fluid.
It is found that the intrinsic thermal conductivity could be obtained when the flow velocity is less than 100

1

mm/sec and ReD1/2Pr1/3 < 100 for DI water and Xceltherm oil under the specified experimental conditions,
where ReD is the Reynolds number and Pr is the Prandtl number.
Keywords: Photothermal Radiometry; Thermal conductivity; Flowing fluid; In-situ Measurement;
Convection heat transfer.
1. Introduction
Measurement of thermal conductivity of fluids is important for the design of heat exchangers [1, 2],
nuclear reactors [3, 4], thermal energy storage systems [5], and many other thermal systems. The ability of
in-situ thermal conductivity measurement of flowing fluids could be useful for the operational safety and
diagnosis of these systems [6, 7]. Despite a multitude of techniques available for the thermal conductivity
measurement of stagnant fluids, including the transient hot-wire (THW) method [8, 9], steady-state method
[10-12], laser flash analysis (LFA) [13, 14], 3ω technique[6, 15, 16], and time or frequency domain thermoreflectance techniques (TDTR/FDTR)[17], there are still challenges of applying these techniques for in-situ
diagnostics, especially under the harsh environment (such as high temperature and/or with corrosive fluids).
Hong et al. applied the 3ω technique for the thermal conductivity measurement of flowing water and
ethanol where a thin metallic transducer layer in contact with the fluid serves as both the heater and the
thermometer. They obtained the thermal conductivity of fluids at low flow velocity [15]. The 3ω technique
was also used for the measurement of thermal properties of flowing gases [12, 18]. Based on the similar
principle, thermal conductivity of flowing fluids has been measured using the TDTR method[19]. Despite
the successful implementation of the in-situ 3ω and TDTR measurements on common fluids, where
dedicated metallic transducers are needed, it is still challenging to extend them for in-situ measurements
under challenging conditions, such as at high temperature and for corrosive fluids (e.g., molten salts for
nuclear reactors [20] and concentrated solar power (CSP) [21]). For example, to avoid the corrosion by
molten salts to the metallic transducer in the 3ω method, a thin protective coating (e.g., alumina) has to be
applied, which not only requires time-consuming microfabrication, but also poses question on the long-

2

term durability[22]. Therefore, a suitable technique for the in-situ thermal conductivity measurement of
flowing fluids under harsh environment would be desirable.
Photothermal radiometry (PTR) using either modulated (continuous wave) or pulsed laser is a wellknown non-contact thermal characterization tool for bulk and coating materials [23-25]. In the modulated
photothermal radiometry (MPR), a sample is heated by an intensity-modulated laser to probe into different
depths of the sample and its surface temperature response is measured with an infrared (IR) detector [24,
26]. We have previously established the MPR technique for high-temperature measurements of bulk and
thin coating samples, by using a refractory black coating for laser absorption and IR surface
thermometry[25]. In this work, we applied the MPR technique for in-situ thermal conductivity measurement
of flowing fluids within a pipe. By modulating the frequency of the laser and controlling the thermal
2α
ω

penetration depth (Lp = √

where α is thermal diffusivity of fluid and ω is the angular frequency)

beyond the wall thickness of the tube and within the momentum/thermal boundary layer of the fluid, we
could get high sensitivity of the surface temperature response to the thermal conductivity of the fluid while
avoiding the convection effect within a certain range of flow velocity, thus obtaining the intrinsic thermal
conductivity of the flowing fluid. We demonstrate the MPR measurement of flowing liquids (DI water,
ethanol, Dowtherm A oil and Xcertherm 600 oil) in a pipe with flow velocity up to 550 mm s-1. The
Reynolds number (ReD ) is ranging from 0 to 13,000 at temperature from 30°C to 170°C, thus covering the
stationary, laminar flow and turbulent flow regimes. Here ReD is defined based on the pipe diameter D. At
low flow velocity and low ReD , the intrinsic thermal conductivity of fluid is obtained. At higher velocity,
the forced convection effect becomes more prominent, and the obtained effective thermal conductivity is
1/2

higher. This transition is found to relate to the dimensionless number ReD Pr1/3, where Pr is the Prandtl
1/2

number. When ReD Pr1/3 is less than 100, we can obtain the intrinsic thermal conductivity of the flowing
fluids. The MPR technique reported here can provide a facile in-situ thermal conductivity diagnostic tool
for flowing fluids with broad applications. It may open an opportunity to simultaneously quantify both the
thermal conductivity and local convective heat transfer coefficient in a fluid loop.

3

2. Experimental Mothed and Modelling
2.1. Experimental Section
Figure 1a displays the schematic of the MPR system integrated with a flowing liquid loop. The MPR
system is the same as what was reported in our previous study [25] except that the test section is replaced
with a circular tube connected to the fluid loop. A waveform-generator drove a continuous wave (CW)
diode laser with its intensity modulated as sinusoidal function at the angular frequency of ω. The laser spot
size was controlled to be around 10 mm in diameter and the laser beam was homogenized from Gaussian
beam into a top-hat profile. The test section was heated up by the modulated laser flux, leading to the
oscillation of the surface temperature rise θs of the sample at the same frequency (ω) as the heating laser.
θs was measured based on the thermal emission from the surface collected by a HgCdTe (MCT) detector
after proper calibration using a pyrometer. More details of the MPR system can be found in our previous
work [25].
The schematic and photograph of the test section of the fluid flowing pipe are shown in Figures 1b
and 1c, respectively. The wall thickness of the test section was set to be 100 μm to have high measurement
sensitivity and accuracy as discussed in the later section. To ensure the mechanical strength of the setup, a
100 μm thick stainless steel 316 (SS316) sheet was wrapped into a round shape and welded onto two short
tubes of 25.4 mm in outer diameter and 1 mm in wall thickness on both ends. The middle thin-walled
section was ~10 cm long to minimize the edge effect due to the change in the wall thickness in this section.
The laser spot was about 10 mm in diameter and was located at the center of the thin-walled region. The
exterior surface of the tube was coated with a 30-μm-thick Pyromark 2500 black coating (see Figure S1 in
Supplementary Information). During the MPR measurement, the laser beam irradiated the center of the
middle thin-walled section. The tube was connected to the fluid loop with the fluid supplied by a pump
from a liquid reservoir with heating capability (ZNCL Vevor 1584321637152051). Four types of fluids
were measured: DI water, ethanol, Xceltherm 600 oil (Radco Industries Inc.), and Dowtherm A oil (Sigma
Aldrich). Liquid was circulating at different flow velocities up to 550 mm s-1 driven by a mechanical pump

4

(HD Portable oil transfer pump, Massive gears 3 phase, Goldenstream Pumps) with a VFD module (ABB
ACS 150 Drive) to control the flow rate, which was also monitored using a flow rate meter. The pump has
an operational temperature limit of ~200 oC, so our measurements were limited to 170 oC.

2.2. Measurement Principle
Figure 2a shows the schematic of the MPR measurement of a flowing fluid inside a tube. The fluid is
supplied from one end of the steel tube at a fixed bulk velocity ub . An intensity-modulated laser at angular
frequency of ω irradiates the surface of the middle thin-walled section. The surface temperature θs is
oscillating at ω. The thermal penetration depth (Lp ) can be adjusted by changing ω of the incident laser.
The thermal emission from the tube surface is collected by an IR detector to measure the θs after calibration
with a pyrometer as described in detail in our earlier work [25]. Figure 2b shows the schematics of the
momentum boundary layer Δ, thermal boundary layer δ and the thermal penetration depth Lp during the
MPR measurement. Assuming laminar flow, the hydrodynamic entrance length Lef and the thermal
entrance length Leh can be estimated by:
Lef = 0.05ReD D,

(1)

Leh = 0.033ReD PrD,

(2)

and

where D is the diameter of the tube. In our measurement, ReD is in the range of 100-13000 and Pr is in the
range of 5-300. Therefore, Lef and Leh are in the range of 13-1650 cm and 42-5450 cm, respectively. The
laser spot (~10 mm diameter) of the MPR measurement is located at middle of the 10-cm long thin-walled
section. Therefore, the fluid flow is still in the hydrodynamic and thermal entrance region at the position of
the MPR measurement. In this region, the thermal boundary layer (δ) is always thinner than the momentum
boundary layer (∆) as they are related by δ = Pr −1/3 ∆ and Pr −1/3 is 0.15-0.58 for the fluids to be
measured. To measure the intrinsic thermal conductivity of a flowing fluid, the thermal penetration depth

5

should be smaller than both the momentum boundary and thermal boundary layer thicknesses: Lp <
min [∆, δ]. In our case, since δ is always smaller than ∆, Lp < δ should be satisfied.
As shown in Figure 2b, at high frequency, Lp is shorter than δ and thus the convection effect is
minimized. In this case, the intrinsic thermal conductivity of the fluid can be obtained. On the contrary, at
low frequency with Lp > δ, the convection effect becomes prominent, leading to overestimation of the
measured thermal conductivity of fluid. It is noted that δ depends on the flowing velocity and both the δ
and Lp depend on the thermophysical properties of the fluid and the temperature, so the desirable frequency
range to obtain the intrinsic thermal conductivity may change with the fluid properties, velocity, and
temperature. In addition, Lp must be larger than the wall thickness of the tube (100 μm) such that the
measurement is more sensitive to the fluid than the wall. Therefore, the frequency and Lp must fall within
a suitable range. In general, Lp in the fluid is controlled to be around ~150 - ~300 μm in our experiments.
Although the measurement is conducted in a cylindrical tube, the 2-D heat transfer model based on the
planar geometry can be applied (as justified later). Within the fluid, in the absence of heat generation or
viscous dissipation and assuming constant thermal properties, the 2D heat transfer equation in the frequency
domain for the flow in the entrance region is:
∂2 θf
∂x 2

+

∂2 θf
∂y 2

jω

ṽ ∂θf
f ∂x

= α θf + α
f

,

(3)

where x is the coordinate in the direction along the fluid flow and y is the direction perpendicular to the
fluid flow as shown in Figure 2b. The position y = 0 is defined at the wall. θf is the temperature of the
fluid, αf is the thermal diffusivity of the fluid, j is the imaginary unit, ṽ is the velocity vector of flowing
fluid and ω is the angular frequency. The velocity profile within the laminar boundary layer assuming a
cubic polynomial is:
ṽ = ub (

3y 1 y 3
− ( ) ),
2∆ 2 ∆

(4)

6

where ub is the bulk velocity. Within a short distance from the wall, the flow pattern can be assumed to be
linear, which is valid when Lp ≪ ∆. As such, equation 4 is reduced to:
3ub
y
2∆

.

(5)

∂ 2 θf ∂ 2 θf jω
3ub y ∂θf
+
=
θf +
.
2
2
∂x
∂y
αf
2αf ∆ ∂x

(6)

ṽ =
Therefore, equation 3 becomes:

Clearly, for y → 0 (near the wall), equation 6 is reduced to a pure heat conduction equation without the
advection term. Therefore, the convection effect is only important when the temperature field reaches deep
into the boundary layer, i.e., at the low frequency where Lp is large. By doing a dimensional analysis, it
was found that the forced convection effect is negligible when the following condition is satisfied [15]:
ub
ω

< Lc ,

(7)

where Lc is the characteristic length scale of the fluid flow. For a fully developed flow, such as the one
studied in Ref. [15], Lc is the radius of the flow channel. In our case studied here, the flow is still in the
entrance region, so Lc should be the momentum boundary layer thickness Δ. If we take Lc = Δ and
vx
ub

knowing Δ = 5√

(for a laminar flow), equation 7 becomes:

2

ub < (5√vxω)3

(8)

where v is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid and x is the characteristic entrance length of the measurement
section as shown in Figure 1b (x = 10 cm in our experiment). Figure 3a shows the critical velocity as a
function of ω. The angular frequency is in the range of 3 – 12 rad s-1 (i.e., f = 0.5 – 2 Hz and Lp = 150 –
300 μm), and thus the critical velocity is ~ 70 mm s-1 to have the negligible forced convection effect. The
critical velocity increases with increasing frequency because the penetration depth decreases with
increasing frequency, and thus the effect of the momentum boundary layer diminishes.
7

The above analysis only examines the velocity and momentum equation. From the heat transfer
point of view, Lp < δ also needs to be satisfied in order to measure the intrinsic thermal conductivity of the
fluid, as discussed earlier. Here we set Lp < 0.2δ:

Lp
δ

αf
πf

(9)

√

=

vx
5√ 1 Pr −1/3

< 0.2,

ub

where x1 is the length of heater and is equal to the laser spot size, i.e., x1 = Dlaser . Rearranging equation
9 leads to:
(10)

DDlaser πf
,
αf

1/2

ReD Pr1/3 < √

where D is the pipe diameter (25 mm), ReD =

ub D
,
ν

and Dlaser = 10 mm in our experiment. Evaluating

1/2

equation 10 at f = 1 Hz, we have ReD Pr1/3 < ~100 as the condition to neglect the forced convection
1/2

effect. On the other hand, when ReD Pr1/3 > ~100, the forced convection effect becomes important, and
the measured effective thermal conductivity is expected to be higher than the intrinsic thermal conductivity
of the fluid. In our measurements, we vary the flow velocity ub , laser modulation frequency f , and
temperature (thus the viscosity) of the fluid to access both the intrinsic thermal conductivity (pure heat
conduction) and forced convection regimes from the fluid flow (equation 8 and figure 3a) and the heat
transfer (equation 10) points of view.
In addition, although the MPR measurement is conducted on a cylindrical tube, the heat transfer can be
modeled based on the planar geometry under certain conditions. To specify these conditions, the thermal
response of a cylindrical tube is compared to that of a flat plate. The surface temperature rise given by the
heat transfer model for a cylindrical tube under the modulated laser heating is [27]:

8

θs,cyl (r, φ, ω) =

qs
2πks
(

2Io (σr)
θ0
I1 (σr)
π
′ (σD/2) sin ( ) + ′ (σD/2) (θ0 + sin(θ0 )) × cos ( − φ)
I0
2
I1
2
(m + 1)θ0
(m + 1)θ0
∞
sin [
] sin [
]
Im (σr)
m
2
2
+2 ∑ ′
× cos [ (π − 2φ)] × [
+
]
Im (σD/2)
2
m+1
m−1
m=2

(11)

)

where ks is the thermal conductivity of the solid tube, θ0 is the center angle of the laser spot and is π/7.8 for
a laser spot diameter (Dlaser = 10 mm); φ is the angle of the detection spot (DIR = 1 mm) relative to the
horizontal position and is π/2 if the laser and IR-detector are well aligned. Im is the mth order modified Bessel
′
function of the first kind and Im
is the derivative of Im. σ = √

iω
αs

, where αs is the thermal diffusivity of steel

tube.
The surface temperature rise of a planar plate under the modulated laser heating is:
π

θs,pl =

(12)

qs e − 4 j
es √ω

where es is thermal effusivity of the plate. Figure 3b compares the thermal responses of a cylindrical tube
and a plate using the thermal properties of steel in Table 1. To quantify the difference between the
cylindrical and planar geometries, the ratio R of the |θs| of a cylindrical tube over that of a plate is also
displayed in Figure 3b, where R is defined as:

R=

(13)

|θs,cyl |
|θs,pl |

The figure shows that the maximum deviation between the two curves is 7% within the entire frequency
range we will use in this experiment (0.5 to 2 Hz). Therefore, it is reasonable to use the simplified analysis
based on the planar geometry. By neglecting the forced convection effect and temperature gradient in the x
direction, and assuming the planar geometry, the frequency-domain heat transfer equation in the fluid
domain (equation 6) can be further simplified as:
∂2 θf
∂y 2

jω

= α θf
f

(14)

9

Equation 14 is the same as the 1D heat conduction equation in a solid substrate. Therefore, the 1D heat
conduction of the three-layered system (i.e., coating, steel containment and fluid, see Figure 2a) can be
modeled as follows[25, 28]:
d

θs = − c qs

(15)

where qs is the AC component of the laser heat flux; θs = Ts – To is the temperature oscillation induced by
the AC component of the heat flux, with Ts as the transient surface temperature and To as the baseline
surface temperature due to the heating by the heaters and DC component of laser; d and c are obtained from
the following transfer matrix:
a
M=(
c

b
) = Mn Mn−1 ⋯ Mi ⋯ M1
d

(16)

where Mi is the transfer matrix for the ith layer, with i = 1, 2 and 3 referring to the coating, steel tube and
fluid, respectively. The transfer matrix Mi is expressed as follows:
cosh (Di √jω)

−

sinh(Di √jω)

ei √jω
Mi = (
)
−ei √jω sinh(Di √jω) cosh (Di √jω)

where Di =

li
√α i

(17)

, li and αi are the thickness and thermal diffusivity of the ith layer, respectively. ei is the

thermal effusivity of the ith layer, i.e., ei = √(ρck)i .
To quantify the forced convection effect on the thermal conductivity measurement, we compare the
thermal responses predicted by the stationary fluid model in equation 15 and that numerically calculated
with COMSOL simulation based on equation 3. The details of the COMSOL simulation are described in
the Supplementary Information Section S2. The modeling parameters are shown in Table 1. As shown in
Figure 4a, at zero bulk velocity (ub = 0 mm s-1), the thermal responses of the analytical stationary fluid
model (equation 15) and the numerical model in COMSOL for the flowing fluid (equation 3) agree well
with each other. It is evident that the thermal response can be divided into three regions: the fluid dominated

10

region at low frequency where the |θs | vs ω −1/2 curve is linear; the steel dominated region at intermediate
frequency where the slope of the |θs | vs ω −1/2 curve becomes smaller because the thermal conductivity of
steel is higher than that of fluid; the coating dominated region at high frequency where the slope is large
due to the low thermal conductivity of coating. In an earlier study, we have experimentally demonstrated
that the thermal conductivity and volumetric heat capacity of different layers can be obtained from the
thermal responses at different frequencies [25]. At the low frequency limit when Lp is much larger than the
thickness of coating and steel, the multilayer model (equation 17) can be simplified as [25, 29]:
π

θs =

qs e − 4 j
ef √ω

(18)
+ qs Rcs

where ef is the thermal effusivity of fluid, defined as ef = √kf ρf cf , where ρf and cf are the density and
specific heat of the fluid, respectively; Rcs is the total thermal resistance by the coating and the steel shell:

Rcs = (1 −

es ls
1 ec2 lc
) + ( − 2)
ef ks
2 ef kc

(19)

where es and ec are the thermal effusivities of the steel shell and the coating, respectively; ls and lc are the
thicknesses of the steel shell and the coating, respectively; ks and kc are the thermal conductivities of the
steel shell and the coating, respectively. Notably, Rcs is independent on the frequency in the low frequency
range, therefore thermal effusivity of the fluid ef can be directly obtained by measuring the slope of the
|θs | vs ω −1/2 curve according to equation 19. At low bulk velocity ub = 10 mm s-1 as shown in Figure 4a,
the thermal response remains the same as that of the stationary fluid. Therefore, the intrinsic thermal
effusivity of fluid can still be obtained by measuring the slope at low frequency range (Lp = 150 – 300 μm).
As ub increases to above 50 mm s-1, the thermal response starts to slightly deviate from that of the stationary
fluid. The curves start to plateau at low frequency at ub > 100 mm s-1, indicating higher effective thermal
effusivity in this regime, or the onset of the forced convection effect. At high flowing velocity, the forced
convection effect becomes important, leading to a higher effective thermal conductivity. Therefore, the
critical velocity is ~ 100 mm s-1 for MPR measurement of intrinsic thermal conductivity of the fluids with

11

the experimental conditions used in this study. The critical velocity predicted by the COMSOL simulation
agrees well with that predicted by the dimensional analysis shown in equation 8.
Figure 4b shows the sensitivity of |θs | on the thermal conductivity of the steel wall ks , Pyromark
coating kc and fluid kf , calculated based on equation 15 using the parameters in Table 1. The sensitivity
of |θs | is defined as:
Sθ =

Δ|θs |/|θs |
Δki /ki

,

(20)

where ki is the thermal property of the steel wall, coating, or fluid (ks , kc , or kf ). For example, the
sensitivity of 1 to kf means that 1% change in kf leads to 1% change in |θs |. As discussed above, |θs | is
more sensitive to kf at the low frequency limit (long thermal penetration depth) and to kc at the high
frequency limit (short thermal penetration depth), while in the intermediate frequency range, it is also
sensitive to ks . Therefore, in this study, kf is extracted from the thermal response in the frequency range of
0.5 to 2 Hz (Lp = 150 – 300 μm) where the sensitivity of |θs | to kf higher than 0.2.
Another important design parameter is the small wall thickness (100 μm) of the MPR section,
which not only ensures high sensitivity of |θs | to kf but also limits the lateral heat spreading effect.
Equation 15 is based on the 1D heat transfer model, which is only valid when there is no significant lateral
heat spreading effect, i.e., with small wall thickness. We analyzed the 2D heat transfer effect in the system
in Supplementary Information Section S3 and found that when the wall thickness is less than 100 μm, the
measurement error of thermal effusivity of the fluid based on the 1D assumption (i.e., equation 15) is less
than 10%. In addition, to satisfy the 1D assumption, one should also ensure Dlaser ≫ Lp [25]. In our
measurement, Lp is ~ 150-300 μm which is much smaller than the Dlaser (~10 mm). The natural convection
effect induced by the temperature gradient is also negligible in the MPR measurement due to the short Lp
as discussed in Supplementary Information Section S4. The heat flux is calibrated using a standard material
with known thermal effusivity e according to equation 12, as shown in Supplementary Information Section

12

S5. This approach avoids the need to precisely measure the laser spot size which is reported to be a major
source of measurement uncertainty[30]. The method of converting the MCT voltage signal to |θs | is also
shown in Supplementary Information Section S5. The MPR measurement uncertainty is 5.8% and the
analysis can be found in our previous work [25].
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Measurement of Stagnant Fluids
Figure 5a shows the thermal responses of different fluids at stagnant state (i.e., ub = 0 mm s-1) and
room temperature. All the thermal response curves can be delineated into three regions: (i) Pyromark
coating dominated region at high frequency with Lp < 30 μm. (ii) tube wall (or substrate) dominated region
in the medium frequency range where the slope is smaller due to the high thermal conductivity of the steel.
The thermal responses in these two regions are the same for all the samples because the same tube with the
same coating was used. (iii) fluid dominated region at low frequency with Lp > ~160 μm, where the slope
is determined by the thermal effusivity of the fluid. According to Equation 18, the thermal effusivity of
1

the fluid ef is obtained from the slope of the |θs | vs. ω −2 curve in the low frequency regime, and the
thermal conductivity of the fluid can be calculated based on the specific heat and density of the fluids
θ

reported in the literature [31-33]. Figure 5b shows the normalized thermal response by the heat flux (qs ) in
s

the frequency range of 0.5-2 Hz, i.e., Lp in the range of 180-320 μm. ef can be directly obtained from the
θ

slopes of the qs vs ω −1/2 curves. Figure 5c compares the measured thermal conductivity of different fluid
s

(eexp ) to the literature values (elit ) while Figure 5d compares the measured thermal conductivity of
different fluid (kexp ) to the literature values (klit ) [31-33]. The measurement results are within 10% error
from the literature values, validating the MPR measurement of stagnant fluids. This error is similar to what
we have reported for MPR measurements on bulk materials [25]. The stagnant fluids can be treated as bulk
materials if the natural convection effect is negligible. In our measurements, Lp in the fluids ranged from
180 to 320 μm in the low-frequency regime, leading to Rayleigh number (Ra) of 1 to 10 for these fluids
13

(the critical Ra for the induction of natural convection is 1100 [34]) and consequently negligible natural
convection effect.
3.2. Measurement of Flowing Fluids at Room Temperature
According to the analysis presented in Section 2, to measure the thermal conductivity of flowing fluids,
the flowing velocity should be lower than the critical velocity to satisfy the condition of negligible forced
convection effect. In this section, we measured Xceltherm oil and DI water at room temperature with
variable flowing velocities to experimentally identify the critical velocity and compare it to the theoretical
analysis. Figure 6a shows the thermal responses of Xceltherm oil. The thermal responses for ub = 0 mm s1

and 90 mm s-1 coincide, indicating negligible forced convection effect up to 90 mm s-1. The thermal

response curves shift downwards with increasing flowing velocities, indicating higher effective thermal
effusivity and thermal conductivity due to the stronger forced convection effect. The effective thermal
1

effusivity of the fluid (eeff ) is obtained from the slope of |θs | vs. ω −2 in the linear region with Lp = 150 300 μm (Equation 18) and the effective thermal conductivity (keff ) is calculated with the literature values
of specific heat and density of the fluids. Figure 6c shows keff normalized to the intrinsic thermal
conductivity (k0 ) of Xceltherm oil, keff /k0 , as a function of ub . keff /k0 is within 5% of the unity when
ub = 0 - 90 mm s-1. At higher velocity, keff /k0 increases, reaching 118% at ub = 250 mm s-1 and 151% at
ub = 500 mm s-1. This result indicates that the intrinsic thermal conductivity of Xceltherm oil can be
measured at ub < 100 mm s-1 for the current MPR configuration, consistent with our theoretical analysis in
Section 2.
Figure 6b shows the thermal responses of DI water. The slopes of the thermal responses from ub = 0
mm s-1 and 90 mm s-1 are close, indicating negligible forced convection effect up to 90 mm s-1. The thermal
response curves shift downwards with increasing velocities, indicating higher effective thermal effusivity
and thermal conductivity due to the forced convection, similar to the Xceltherm oil. The curve shows a
plateau in low frequency region at ub = 550 mm s-1, indicating a significantly higher effective thermal

14

effusivity in this region. Figure 6c shows keff normalized to the intrinsic thermal conductivity (k0 ) of DI
water, keff /k0 , as a function of ub . keff /k0 is within 5% of the unity when ub = 0 - 90 mm s-1. At higher
velocity, keff /k0 increases, reaching 118% at ub = 190 mm s-1. The above analysis indicates that the
intrinsic thermal conductivity of DI water can also be measured at ub < 100 mm s-1, which is close to the
prediction from the COMSOL simulation as shown in Figure 4a and the dimensional analysis shown in
Figure 3a. It is also worth noting that the forced convection effect is stronger for DI water than Xceltherm
oil at the same flowing velocity. The keff /k0 reaches 310% at ub = 347 mm s-1 and 1130% at ub = 550
mm s-1 for DI water (versus 151% at ub = 500 mm for Xceltherm). This is because the viscosity of oil is
higher, leading to a lower ReD number at the same flow velocity, which will be further discussed in the
later section.
3.3. Measurement of Flowing Fluids at Higher Temperature
Figure 7a and 7b show the thermal responses for DI water and Xceltherm 600 oil, respectively, at the
same velocity of ub = 90 mm s-1 with fluid temperature (T0) ranging from 30°C to 170°C. The upper
temperature limit is set so to avoid boiling of water or ignition of oil in air. Like the analysis done in the
previous section, eeff of fluid is obtained from the slope at low frequency and then the keff is calculated.
7d compares keff of DI water and the oil to the literature value k0 at different temperature. keff of DI
water is close to k0 from 30°C to 60°C. For the Xceltherm oil, keff is close to k0 at T0 < 100°C. However,
keff of the oil increases significantly at T0 > 100°C; keff /k0 is 154.5% and 168.1% at 140°C and 170°C,
respectively due to the strong forced convection at higher temperature. The viscosity of the oil decreases
with increasing temperature, and thus ReD increases at higher temperature, leading to stronger forced
convection effect. Figure 7c shows the thermal responses for the oil at the velocity of ub = 50 mm s-1 with
To from 90°C to 170°C. As shown in Figure 7d, by reducing the flow velocity to 50 mm s-1, keff of
Xceltherm oil agrees well with k0 at all the temperatures. Evidently, the critical velocity varies with the
type of the fluid and the temperature, which will be discussed in the next section.

15

3.4. Analysis of Forced Convection Effect
To systematically study the forced convection effect, we further measured the two fluids at different
velocities: (a) Xceltherm oil from 45-170°C with flowing velocity of 50 mm s-1, 90 mm s-1, 250 mm s-1 and
300 mm s-1; and (b) DI water at 30 °C with flowing velocity of 90 mm s-1, 190 mm s-1, 350 mm s-1 and 550
mm s-1. Figure 8a shows the normalized thermal conductivity (keff /k0 ) from all the measurements of DI
water and Xceltherm 600 as a function of ReD . It can be seen that keff /k0 increases with increasing ReD .
Although the range of velocity is the same for DI water and Xceltherm oil, ReD for DI water is much higher
due to the lower viscosity. At ub > 190 mm s-1, ReD > 10,000, the flow of the water becomes turbulent,
leading to strong forced convection effect. Therefore, keff also increases significantly. The viscosity of the
oil decreases with increasing temperature, and thus ReD is higher at higher temperature. As a result, keff
directly obtained from the measurement is increasingly overestimated compared to k0 as the temperature
increases, as shown in Figure 7d. However, compared to DI water, ReD for Xceltherm is less than 10,000
and the flow is still laminar within the entire flow velocity range.
1/2

Here we plot keff /k0 as a function of ReD Pr1/3 in Figure 8b. Notably, keff /k0 of both DI water
1/2

and Xceltherm 600 follows the same trend as ReD Pr1/3 increases, except the outliner for DI water at high
1/2

ReD Pr1/3value (>200) because the water flow is turbulent, which does not follow the NuD correlation
for a laminar flow. The forced convection effect is negligible for both liquids at ReD1/2Pr1/3 < 100 and
1/2

becomes increasingly prominent as ReD Pr1/3 increases. This agrees well with the theoretical analysis as
shown in equation 10. Therefore, we conclude that it is feasible to use the MPR technique developed here
to measure the intrinsic thermal conductivity of flowing fluids under the condition of both low ub and low
1/2

ReD Pr1/3 (or more generally, equation 7 and equation 11 are both satisfied). On the other hand, this
work also suggests that the MPR could be used to probe the convection effect of flowing fluids when ub or
1/2

ReD Pr1/3 is larger.

16

4. Conclusion
In this work, we develop an MPR setup to measure the thermal conductivity of flowing fluid in a tube
by controlling the modulation frequency of heating laser beam and the corresponding thermal penetration
depth. The MPR setup is first validated by the thermal conductivity measurement of stationary fluids,
including DI-water, Dowtherm A oil, Xceltherm 600 oil and ethanol at room temperature. The measurement
error of stationary fluid is within 10%. Subsequently, the MPR setup is extended for the measurement of
flowing fluid in the velocity range of 0 – 550 mm s-1 and from room temperature to 170°C. The intrinsic
thermal conductivity of fluid can be obtained at low velocity where the forced convection effect is
minimized. The forced convection effect becomes prominent at high flow velocity and low frequency,
leading to the overestimation of thermal conductivity. The critical velocity is determined by the
1/2

1/2

dimensionless number ReD Pr1/3 modeled based on the laminar boundary layer. When ReD Pr1/3 < 100,
the intrinsic thermal conductivity of fluid can be obtained. The MPR technique reported here provides a
convenient tool of in-situ thermal conductivity measurement of flowing fluid and shows the potential to
characterize the local forced convection heat transfer close to the wall.
Supplementary Information
Photo of the MPR system; COMSOL simulation of flowing fluid; Analysis of 2D heat transfer
effect in the MPR measurement; Analysis of natural convection effect in the MPR measurement; Method
of heat flux and temperature calibration.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) under Solar Energy Technologies Office (SETO) Agreement
Number DE-EE0008379. The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S.
Department of Energy or the United States Government.

Author contribution statement
17

R.C. conceived the idea. J.Z. and K.C. built the MPR setup, performed the modeling and
measurements, and analyzed the data. S. A. conducted the measurement of stationary fluid and calibration
of system. T.F. conducted the COMSOL simulation. JZ and RC wrote the manuscript, with inputs from all
the coauthors.

18

Figure and Table Captions
Figure 1. MPR system integrated with a flowing fluid loop. (a) Overview of the system. Schematic (b)
and photograph (c) of the MPR measurement section.
Figure 2. Schematic of MPR measurement on flowing fluid in a tube. (a) Schematic of the MPR
measurement section. (b) Schematics of momentum boundary, thermal boundary and thermal penetration
depth in the MPR measurement in a 2D model.
Figure 3. Simplification of heat transfer modeling in the fluid domain. (a) Configuration of MPR
measurement on flowing fluid for minimum forced convection effect. (b) Comparison of thermal responses
between the cylindrical and planar geometries. The left y-axis is the amplitude of surface temperature
oscillation and the right y-axis (R) is the ratio of the |θs| between the cylindrical and planar geometries.
Figure 4. Modeling of thermal response of flowing fluid and measurement error analysis of the thermal
conductivity of fluid due to the forced convection. (a) Effect of flowing velocity ub on the thermal response.
The solid line from the analytical model is based on equation 16 and the symbols are results from finite
element modeling. (b) Sensitivity on the thermal conductivities of coating, steel tube and fluid at ub = 0
mm s-1.
Figure 5. MPR measurement on stationary fluids at room temperature. (a) Thermal responses of different
stagnant fluids filled in the MPR measurement section (tube wall thickness: 100 μm; Pyromark coating
thickness: ~ 30 μm). LP is estimated based on the properties of DI water. (b) Thermal responses of different
stagnant fluids at the low frequency range of 0.5-2 Hz. (c) Comparison of the thermal effusivity measured
using MPR and that reported in the literature. (d) Comparison of the thermal conductivity measured using
MPR and that reported in the literature.
Figure 6. MPR measurement on flowing fluids at room temperature. (a) Thermal response of Xceltherm
600 oil in a tube flowing at different velocities. (b) Thermal response of DI water in a tube flowing at
different velocities. (c) Normalized thermal conductivity as a function of flow velocity for DI water and

19

Xceltherm 600 oil. The thermal effusivity measured from the slopes of the thermal response curves are used
to calculate the thermal conductivity based on the density and specific heats in the literature.
Figure 7. MPR measurement of flowing fluids at elevated temperature. (a) Thermal responses of DI water
at ub = 90 mm s-1 at 30-60°C. (b) Thermal response of Xceltherm 600 oil at ub = 90 mm s-1 at 45-170°C. (c)
Thermal response of Xceltherm 600 oil at ub = 50 mm s-1 at 90-170°C. (d) Effective thermal conductivities
of DI water and Xceltherm 600 oil as a function of temperature measured at ub = 90 mm s-1 and ub = 50 mm
s-1.
Figure 8. Analysis of forced convection effect in flowing fluid. (a) Normalized thermal conductivity as a
function of ReD number for DI-water and Xceltherm 600 oil. (b) Normalized thermal conductivities of DI
1/2

water and Xceltherm 600 oil as a function of ReD Pr1/3 at different temperatures.
Table 1. Simulation parameters for stationary fluid in a tube

20

Figure 1. MPR system integrated with a flowing fluid loop. (a) Overview of the system. Schematic (b)
and photograph (c) of the MPR measurement section of the pipe for the fluid flow.

21

Figure 2. Schematic of MPR measurement on flowing fluid in a tube. (a) Schematic of the MPR
measurement section. (b) Schematics of momentum boundary, thermal boundary and thermal penetration
depth in the MPR measurement in a 2D model.

22

Figure 3. Simplification of heat transfer modeling in the fluid domain. (a) Configuration of MPR
measurement on flowing fluid for minimum forced convection effect. (b) Comparison of thermal responses
between the cylindrical and planar geometries. The left y-axis is the amplitude of surface temperature
oscillation and the right y-axis (R) is the ratio of the |θs| between the cylindrical and planar geometries.

23

Figure 4. Numeric modeling of thermal response of flowing fluid and measurement error analysis of the
thermal conductivity of fluid due to the forced convection. (a) Effect of flowing velocity ub on the thermal
response. The solid line from the analytical model is based on equation 15 and the symbols are results from
finite element modeling using COMSOL. (b) Sensitivity on the thermal conductivities of coating, steel
tube and fluid at ub = 0 mm s-1.

24

Figure 5. MPR measurement on stationary fluids at room temperature. (a) Thermal responses of different
stagnant fluids filled in the MPR measurement section (tube wall thickness: 100 μm; Pyromark coating
thickness: ~ 30 μm). LP is estimated based on the properties of DI water. (b) Thermal responses of different
stagnant fluids at the low frequency range of 0.5-2 Hz. (c) Comparison of the thermal effusivity measured
using MPR and the literature values. (d) Comparison of the thermal conductivity measured using MPR and
the literature values. Note the data of Dowtherm A oil and Xcetherm oil 600 are overlapped in (b), (c), and
(d).

25

Figure 6. MPR measurement on flowing fluids at room temperature. (a) Thermal response of Xceltherm
600 oil in a tube flowing at different velocities. (b) Thermal response of DI water in a tube flowing at
different velocities. (c) Normalized thermal conductivity as a function of flow velocity for DI water and
Xceltherm 600 oil. The thermal effusivity measured from the slopes of the thermal response curves are used
to calculate the thermal conductivity based on the density and specific heats in the literature [31-33].

26

Figure 7. MPR measurement of flowing fluids at elevated temperature. (a) Thermal responses of DI water
at ub = 90 mm s-1 at 30-60°C. (b) Thermal response of Xceltherm 600 oil at ub = 90 mm s-1 at 45-170°C.
(c) Thermal response of Xceltherm 600 oil at ub = 50 mm s-1 at 90-170°C. (d) Effective thermal
conductivities of DI water and Xceltherm 600 oil as a function of temperature measured at ub = 90 mm s-1
and ub = 50 mm s-1.

27

Figure 8. Analysis of forced convection effect in flowing fluid. (a) Normalized thermal conductivity as a
function of ReD number for DI-water and Xceltherm 600 oil. (b) Normalized thermal conductivities of DI
1/2

water and Xceltherm 600 oil as a function of ReD Pr1/3 at different temperatures.

28

Table 1. Simulation parameters for stationary fluid within a tube
Parameter
Tube Diameter D
Thickness of Tube Shell ls
Thickness of Coating lc
Thermal Conductivity of Steel Tube ks
Thermal Conductivity of Coating kc
Thermal Conductivity of Fluid kf
Thermal Diffusivity of Tube αs
Thermal Diffusivity of Coating αc
Thermal Diffusivity of Fluid αf
Heat Flux qs
Heating Laser Diameter DLaser
Detection Spot Diameter DIR

Value
25
100
30
20
0.5 [25]
0.6
5
0.4
0.16
13700
10
1

Unit
mm
μm
μm
W m-1 K-1
W m-1 K-1
W m-1 K-1
mm2 s-1
mm2 s-1
mm2 s-1
W m-2
mm
mm

29

References
[1] P. Li, E. Molina, K. Wang, X. Xu, G. Dehghani, A. Kohli, Q. Hao, M.H. Kassaee, S.M. Jeter, A.S. Teja,
Thermal and transport properties of NaCl–KCl–ZnCl2 eutectic salts for new generation high-temperature
heat-transfer fluids, Journal of Solar Energy Engineering, 138(5) (2016).
[2] M. Mehos, C. Turchi, J. Vidal, M. Wagner, Z. Ma, C. Ho, W. Kolb, C. Andraka, A. Kruizenga,
Concentrating solar power Gen3 demonstration roadmap, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL),
Golden, CO (United States), 2017.
[3] J. Van der Meer, R. Konings, Thermal and physical properties of molten fluorides for nuclear
applications, Journal of nuclear materials, 360(1) (2007) 16-24.
[4] D.E. Holcomb, G.F. Flanagan, G.T. Mays, W.D. Pointer, K.R. Robb, G.L. Yoder Jr, Fluoride salt-cooled
high-temperature reactor technology development and demonstration roadmap, ORNL/TM-2013/401,
ORNL, Oak Ridge, TN, (2013).
[5] G. Alva, Y. Lin, G. Fang, An overview of thermal energy storage systems, Energy, 144 (2018) 341-378.
[6] W. Hodges, C. Dames, A multi-frequency 3 ω method for tracking moving phase boundaries, Review
of Scientific Instruments, 90(9) (2019) 094903.
[7] C. Clausen, T. Pedersen, A. Bentien, The 3-omega method for the measurement of fouling thickness,
the liquid flow rate, and surface contact, Sensors, 17(3) (2017) 552.
[8] S. Lee, S.-S. Choi, S. Li, and, J. Eastman, Measuring thermal conductivity of fluids containing oxide
nanoparticles, (1999).
[9] R. Perkins, H. Roder, C.N. de Castro, A high-temperature transient hot-wire thermal conductivity
apparatus for fluids, Journal of research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, 96(3)
(1991) 247.
[10] V. Sklyarchuk, Y. Plevachuk, A modified steady state apparatus for thermal conductivity
measurements of liquid metals and semiconductors, Measurement Science and Technology, 16(2)
(2005) 467.
[11] C.H. Li, W. Williams, J. Buongiorno, L.-W. Hu, G. Peterson, Transient and steady-state experimental
comparison study of effective thermal conductivity of Al2O3∕ water nanofluids, Journal of heat
Transfer, 130(4) (2008).
[12] C.J. Hepp, F.T. Krogmann, G.A. Urban, Flow rate independent sensing of thermal conductivity in a
gas stream by a thermal MEMS-sensor–simulation and experiments, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical,
253 (2017) 136-145.
[13] S. Stankus, I. Savchenko, Laser flash method for measurement of liquid metals heat transfer
coefficients, Thermophysics and Aeromechanics, 16(4) (2009) 585-592.
[14] H. Ohta, G. Ogura, Y. Waseda, M. Suzuki, Thermal diffusivity measurements of molten salts using a
three‐layered cell by the laser flash method, Review of scientific instruments, 61(10) (1990) 2645-2649.
[15] J. Hong, D. Kim, Measuring the thermal conductivity of flowing liquid samples using the three
omega method, Journal of heat transfer, 134(9) (2012).
[16] S. Roy-Panzer, T. Kodama, S. Lingamneni, M.A. Panzer, M. Asheghi, K.E. Goodson, Thermal
characterization and analysis of microliter liquid volumes using the three-omega method, Review of
Scientific Instruments, 86(2) (2015) 024901.
[17] A. Schmidt, M. Chiesa, X. Chen, G. Chen, An optical pump-probe technique for measuring the
thermal conductivity of liquids, Review of Scientific Instruments, 79(6) (2008) 064902.
[18] D. Reyes-Romero, A.S. Cubukcu, G. Urban, Determination of thermal properties of gases under flow
conditions, in: SENSORS, 2014 IEEE, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1644-1647.
[19] M. Mehrvand, S.A. Putnam, Probing the local heat transfer coefficient of water-cooled
microchannels using time-domain thermoreflectance, Journal of Heat Transfer, 139(11) (2017).

30

[20] S. Guo, J. Zhang, W. Wu, W. Zhou, Corrosion in the molten fluoride and chloride salts and materials
development for nuclear applications, Progress in Materials Science, 97 (2018) 448-487.
[21] A. Bonk, S. Sau, N. Uranga, M. Hernaiz, T. Bauer, Advanced heat transfer fluids for direct molten salt
line-focusing CSP plants, Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 67 (2018) 69-87.
[22] M. Wingert, A. Zhao, Y. Kodera, S. Obrey, J. Garay, Frequency-domain hot-wire sensor and 3D
model for thermal conductivity measurements of reactive and corrosive materials at high temperatures,
Review of Scientific Instruments, 91(5) (2020) 054904.
[23] M. Depriester, P. Hus, S. Delenclos, A.H. Sahraoui, New methodology for thermal parameter
measurements in solids using photothermal radiometry, Rev Sci Instrum, 76(7) (2005) 074902.
[24] R. Fuente, E. Apinaniz, E. Mendioroz, Simultaneous measurement of thermal diffusivity and optical
absorption coefficient using photothermal radiometry, J Appl Phys, 110(3) (2011) 033515.
[25] J. Zeng, K.M. Chung, Q. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Pei, P. Li, R. Chen, Measurement of High-temperature
Thermophysical Properties of Bulk and Coatings Using Modulated Photothermal Radiometry,
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 170 (2021) 120989.
[26] A. Salazar, R. Fuente, E. Apinaniz, A. Mendioroz, R. Celorrio, Simultaneous measurement of thermal
diffusivity and optical absorption coefficient using photothermal radiometry. II Multilayered solids,, J
Appl Phys, 110(3) (2011) 033516.
[27] C. Wang, A. Mandelis, Y. Liu, Photothermal radiometry with solid cylindrical samples, Journal of
applied physics, 96(7) (2004) 3756-3762.
[28] D. Zhao, X. Qian, X. Gu, S.A. Jajja, R. Yang, Measurement techniques for thermal conductivity and
interfacial thermal conductance of bulk and thin film materials, Journal of Electronic Packaging, 138(4)
(2016).
[29] R. Kato, I. Hatta, Thermal conductivity measurement of thermally-oxidized SiO 2 films on a silicon
wafer using a thermo-reflectance technique, International Journal of Thermophysics, 26(1) (2005) 179190.
[30] J.A. Malen, K. Baheti, T. Tong, Y. Zhao, J.A. Hudgings, A. Majumdar, Optical measurement of thermal
conductivity using fiber aligned frequency domain thermoreflectance, Journal of Heat Transfer, 133(8)
(2011).
[31] N.B. Vargaftik, Handbook of physical properties of liquids and gases-pure substances and mixtures,
(1975).
[32] İ. Dinçer, C. Zamfirescu, Drying phenomena: theory and applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
[33] https://www.radcoind.com/media/600-EP.pdf.
[34] W. Hiller, T. Kowalewski, F. Stella, Onset of natural convection in a cube, International journal of
heat and mass transfer, 36(13) (1993) 3251-3263.

31

