General System theory, Like-Quantum Semantics and Fuzzy Sets
Ignazio Licata
Isem, Institute for Scientific Methodology, Pa, Italy
Ignazio.licata@ejtp.info
Abstract: It is outlined the possibility to extend the quantum formalism in relation to the
requirements of the general systems theory. It can be done by using a quantum semantics
arising from the deep logical structure of quantum theory. It is so possible taking into account the
logical openness relationship between observer and system. We are going to show how
considering the truth-values of quantum propositions within the context of the fuzzy sets is here
more useful for systemics . In conclusion we propose an example of formal quantum coherence.

Key-words: Quantum Theory; Fuzzy Sets; System Theory; Syntax and Semantics of Scientific
Theories; Logical Openness.
Published in Systemics of Emergence. Research and Development, Minati G., Pessa E., Abram M.,
Springer, 2006, pages 723-734.

1.The role of syntactics and semantics in general system theory
The omologic element breaks specializations up, forces taking into account different things at the same time, stirs up the
interdependent game of the separated sub-totalities, hints at a broader totality whose laws are not the ones of its
components. In other words, the omologic method is an anti-separatist and reconstructive one, which thing makes it
unpleasant to specialists.
F. Rossi-Landi 1985

The systemic-cybernetic approach ( Wiener, 1961; von Bertalannfy,1968; Klir, 1991) requires a
careful evaluation of epistemology as the critical praxis internal to the building up of the scientific
discourse. That is why the usual referring to a "connective tissue" shared in common by different
subjects could be misleading. As a matter of fact every scientific theory is the outcome of a
complex conceptual construction aimed to the problem peculiar features, so what

we are

interested in is not a framework shaping an abstract super-scheme made by the "filtering" of the
particular sciences, but a research focusing on the global and foundational characteristics of
scientific activity in a trans-disciplinary perspective.

According to such view, we can understand

the General System Theory (GST) by the analogy to metalogic. It deals with the possibilities and
boundaries of various formal systems to a more higher degree than any specific structure.
A scientific theory presupposes a certain set of relations between observer and system, so
GST has the purpose to investigate the possibility of describing the multeity of system-observer

1

relationships. The GST main goal is delineating a formal epistemology to study the scientific
knowledge formation, a science able to speak about science. Succeeding to outline such
panorama will make possible analysing those inter-disciplinary processes which are more and
more important in studying complex systems and they will be guaranteed the "transportability"
conditions of a modellistic set from a field to another one. For instance, during a theory developing,
syntax gets more and more structured by putting univocal constraints on semantics according to
the operative requirements of the problem. Sometimes it can be useful generalising a syntactic tool
in a new semantic domain so as to formulate new problems. Such work, a typically transdisciplinary one, can only be done by the tools of a GST able to discuss new relations between
syntactics (formal model) and semantics ( model usage). It is here useful to consider again the
omologic

perspective, which not only

identifies analogies and isomorphisms in pre-defined

structures, but aims to find out a structural and dynamical relation among theories to an higher
level of analysis, so providing new use possibilities (Rossi-Landi, 1985). Which thing is particularly
useful in studying complex systems, where the very essence of the problem itself makes a
dynamic use of models necessary to describe the emergent features of the system (Minati &
Brahms, 2002; Collen, 2002).
We want here to briefly discuss such GST acceptation, and then showing the possibility of
modifying the semantics of

Quantum Mechanics (QM) so to get a conceptual tool fit for the

systemic requirements.

2. Observer as emergence surveyor and semantic ambiguity solver
What we look at is not Nature in itself, but Nature unveiling to our questioning methods.
W. Heisenberg, 1958

A very important and interesting question in system theory can be stated as follows: given a set
of measurement systems M and of theories T related to a system S, is it always possible to order
them, such that Ti-1

Ti, where the partial order symbol

is used to denote the relationship

"physically weaker than" ? We shall point out that, in this case, the ith theory of the chain contains
more information than the preceding ones. This consequently leads to a second key question: can
an unique final theory Tf describe exhaustively each and every aspect of system S ? From the
informational and metrical side, this is equivalent to state that all of the information contained in a
system S can be extracted, by means of adequate measurement processes.
The fundamental proposition for reductionism is, in fact, the idea that such a theory chain will
be sufficient to give a coherent and complete description for a system S. Reductionism, in the light
of our definitions, coincides therefore with the highest degree of semantic space "compression";
each object D ∈ Ti in S has a definition in a theory Ti belonging to the theory chain, and the latter
is - on its turn - related to the fundamental explanatory level of the "final" theory Tf. This implies that

2

each aspect in a system S is unambiguously determined by the syntax described in Tf. Each
system S can be described at a fundamental level, but also with many phenomenological
descriptions, each of these descriptions can be considered an approximation of the "final" theory.
Anyway, most of the "interesting" systems we deal with cannot be included in this chainedtheory syntax compatibility program: we have to consider this important aspect for a correct
epistemic definition of systems "complexity". Let us illustrate this point with a simple reasoning,
based upon the concepts of logical openness and intrinsic emergence (Minati, Pessa, Penna,
1998; Licata, 2003b).
Each measurement operation can be theoretically coded on a Turing machine. If a coherent
and complete fundamental description Tf exists, then there will also exist a finite set - or, at most,
countably infinite - of measurement operations M which can extract each and every single
information that describes the system S. We shall call such a measurement set Turing-observer.
We can easily imagine Turing-observer as a robot that executes a series of measurements on a
system. The robot is guided by a program built upon rules belonging to the theory T. It can be
proved, though, that this is only possible for logically closed systems, or at most for systems with a
very low degree of logical openness. When dealing with highly logically open systems, no recursive
formal criterion exists that can be as selective as requested (i.e., automatically choose which
information is relevant to describe and characterize the system, and which one is not), simply
because it is not possible to isolate the system from the environment. This implies that the Turingobserver hypothesis does not hold for fundamental reasons, strongly related to Zermelo-Fraenkel's
choice axiom and to classical Godel's decision problems. In other words, our robot executes the
measurements always following the same syntactics, whereas the scenario showing intrinsic
emergence is semantically modified. So it is impossible thinking to codify any possible
measurement in a logically open system!
The observer therefore plays a key rule, unavoidable as a semantic ambiguity solver: only the
observer can and will single out intrinsic-observational emergence properties ( Bass &
Emmeche,1997; Cariani, 1991), and subsequently plan adequate measurement processes to
describe what

– as a matter of fact- have turned in

new systems. System complexity is

structurally bound to logical openness and is, at the same time, both an expression of highly
organized system behaviours (long-range correlations, hierarchical structure, and so on) and an
observer's request for new explanatory models.
So, a GST has to allow - in the very same theoretical context – to deal with the observer as an
emergence surveyor in a logical open system. In particular, it is clear that the observer itself is a
logical open system.
Moreover, it has to be pointed out that the co-existence of many description levels – compatible but
not each other deductible – leads to intrinsic uncertainty situations, linked to the different
frameworks by which a system property can be defined.

3

3. Like-quantum semantics
I'm not happy with all the analyses that go with just the classical theory, because nature isn't classical, damm it,
and if you want to make a simulation of nature, you'd better make it quantum mechanical, and by golly it's a wonderful
problem, because it doesn't look so easy. Thank you.
R. P. Feyman, 1981

When we modify and/or amplify a theory so as to being able to speak about different systems
from the ones they were fitted for, it could be better to look at the theory deep structural features so
as to get an abstract perspective able to fulfil the omologic approach requirements, aiming to point
out a non-banal conceptual convergence.
As everybody knows, the logic of classical physics is a dichotomic language (tertium non
datur), relatively orthocomplemented and able to fulfil the weak distributivity relations by the logical
connectives AND/OR. Such features are the core of the Boolean commutative elements of this
logic because disjunctions and conjunctions are symmetrical and associative operations. We shall
here dwell on the systemic consequences of these properties. A system S can get or not to get a
given property P. Once we fix the P truth-value it is possible to keep on our research over a new
preposition P subordinated to the previous one's truth-value. Going ahead, we add a new piece of
information to our knowledge about the system. So the relative orthocomplementation axiom
grants that we keep on following a successions of steps, each one making our uncertainty about
the system to diminish or, in case of a finite amount of steps, to let us defining the state of the
system by determining all its properties. Each system's property can be described by a countable
infinity of atomic propositions. So, such axiom plays the role of a describable axiom for classical
systems.
The unconstrained use of such kind of axiom tends to hide the conceptual problems spreading
up from the fact that every description implies a context, as we have seen in the case of Turingobserver analysis, and it seems to imply that systemic properties are independent of the observer,
it surely is a non-valid statement when we deal with open logical systems. In particular, the
Boolean features point out that it is always possible carrying out exhaustively a synchronic
description of the properties of a systems. In other words, every question about the system is not
depending on the order we ask it and it is liable to a fixed answer we will indicate as 0- false / 1true. It can be suddenly noticed that the emergent features otherwise get a diachronic nature and
can easily make such characteristics not taken for granted. By using Venn diagrams it is possible
providing a representation of the complete descriptiveness of a system ruled by classical logics. If
the system's state is represented by a point and a property of its by a set of points, then it is always
possible a complete "blanketing" of the universal set I, which means the always universally true
proposition. (see fig. 1).

4

The quantum logics shows deep differences which could be extremely useful for our goals
(Birkhoff & von Neumann, 1936; Piron, 1964). At the beginning it was born to clarify some QM's
counter-intuitive sides , later it has developed as an autonomous field greatly independent from the
matters which gave birth to it. We will abridge here the formal references to an essential survey,
focusing on some points of general interest in systemics.
The quantum language is a non-Boolean orthomodular structure, which is to say it is relatively
orthocomplemented but non-commutative, for the crack down of the distributivity axiom. Such thing
comes naturally from the Heisenberg Indetermination Principle and binds the truth- value of an
assertion to the context and the order by which it has been investigated (Griffiths, 1995). A wellknown example is the one of a particle's spin measurement along a given direction. In this case we
deal with semantically well defined possibilities and yet intrinsically uncertain. Let put Ψx
the spin measurement along the direction x. For the indetermination principle the value Ψy will be
totally uncertain, yet the proposition Ψ y =0 ∨

Ψy =1 is necessarily true. In general, if P is a

proposition , (-P ) its negation and Q the property which does not commute with P, then we will get
a situation that can be represented by a "patchy" blanketing of the set I (see fig.2).

5

Such configuration finds its essential meaning just in its relation with the observer. So we can
state that when a situation can be described by a quantum logics, a system is never completely
defined a priori. The measurement process by which the observer's action takes place is a choice
fixing some system's characteristics and letting other ones undefined. It happens just for the nature
itself of the observer-system inter-relationship. Each observation act gives birth to new descriptive
possibilities. The proposition Q – in the above example – describes properties that cannot be
defined by any implicational chain of propositions P. Since the intrinsic emergence cannot be
regarded as a system property independent of the observer

action- as in naïve classical

emergentism - , Q can be formally considered the expression of an emergent property. Now we are
strongly tempted to define as emergent the undefined proposition of quantum-like anticommutative language. In particular, it can be showed that a non-Boolean and irreducible
orthomodular language arises infinite propositions. It means that for each couple of propositions P1
and P2 such that non of them imply the other , there exists infinite propositions Q which imply P1

∨ P2 without necessarily implying the two of them separately: tertium datur. In a sense, the
disjunction of the two propositions gets more information than their mere set-sum, that is the
entirely opposite of what happens in the Boolean case. It is now easy to comprehend the deep
relation binding the anti-commutativity, indetermination principles and system's holistic global
structure. A system describable by a Boolean structure can be completely "solved" by analysing
the sub-systems defined by a fit decomposition process( Heylighen, 1990; Abram, 2002). On the
contrary, in the anti-commutative case studying any sub-system modifies the entire system in an
irreversible and structural way and produces uncertainty correlated to the gained information,
which think makes absolutely natural extending the indetermination principles to a big deal of
spheres of strong interest for systemics (Volkenshtein , 1988).

6

A particularly key-matter is how to conceptually managing the infinite cardinality of emergent
propositions in a lik-quantum semantics. As everybody knows traditional QM refers to the
frequentistic probability worked out within the Copenhagen Interpretation (CIQM). It is essentially a
sub specie probabilitatis Boolean logics extension. The values between [0,1] - i.e. between the
completely and always true proposition I and the always false one O – are meant as expectation
values, or the probabilities associated to any measurable property. Without dwelling on the
complex – and as for many questions still open – debate on QM interpretation, we can here ask if
the probabilistic acception of truth-values is the fittest for system theory. As it usually happens
when we deal with trans-disciplinary feels, it will bring us to add a new, and of remarkable interest
for the "ordinary" QM too, step to our search.
4. A Fuzzy Interpretation of Quantum Languages
A slight variation in the founding axioms of a theory can give way to huge changings on the frontier.
S. Gudder, 1988

The study of the structural and logical facets of quantum semanics does not provide any
necessary indications about the most suitable algebraic space to implement its own ideas. One of
the thing which made a big merit of such researches has been to put under discussion the key role
of Hilbert space. In our approach we have kept the QM "internal" problems and its extension to
systemic questions well separated. Anyway, the last ones suggest an interpretative possibility
bounded to fuzzy logic, which thing can considerably affect the traditional QM too. The fuzzy set
theory is , in its essence, a formal tool created to deal with information characterized with
vagueness and indeterminacy. The by-now classical paper of Lotfi Zadeh (Zadeh, 1965) brings to
a conclusion an old tradition of logics, which counts Charles S. Peirce, Jan C. Smuts, Bertrand
Russell, Max Black and Ian Lukasiewicz among its forerunners. At the core of the fuzzy theory lies
the idea that an element can belong to a set to a variable degree of membership; the same goes
for a proposition and its variable relation to the true and false logical constants. We underline here
two aspects of particular interest for our aims. The fuzziness' definition concerns single elements
and properties, but not a statistical ensemble, so it has to be considered a completely different
concept from the probability one, it should –by now- be widely clarified (Mamdani, 1977; Kosko,
1990). A further essential – even maybe less evident – point is that fuzzy theory calls up a nonalgorithmic "oracle", an observator (i.e. a logical open system and a semantic ambiguity solver) to
make a choice as for the membership degree. In fact, the most part of the theory in its structure is
free-model; no equation and no numerical value create constraints to the quantitative evaluation,
being the last one the model builder's task. There consequently exists a deep bound between
systemics and fuzziness successfully expressed by the Zadeh's incompatibility principle (Zadeh,
1972) which satisfies our requirement for a generalized indeterminacy principle. It states that by

7

increasing the system complexity (i.e. its logical openness degree), it will decrease our ability to
make exact statements and proved predictions about its behaviour. There already exists many
examples of crossing between fuzzy theory and QM (Dalla Chiara, Giuntini, 1995; Cattaneo, Dalla
Chiara, Giuntini 1993). We want here to delineate the utility of fuzzy polyvalence for systemic
interpretation of quantum semantics.
Let us consider a complex system, such as a social group, a mind and a biological organism.
Each of these cases show typical emergent features owed both to the interaction among its
components and the inter-relations with the environment. An act of the observer will fix some
properties and will let some others undetermined according to a non-Boolean logic. The recording
of such properties will depend on the succession of the measurement acts and their very nature.
The kind of complexity into play, on the other hand, prevents us by stating what the system state is
so as to associate to the measurement of a property an expectation probabilistic value. In fact, just
the above-mentioned examples are related to macroscopic systems for which the probabilistic
interpretation of QM is patently not valid. Moreover, the traditional application of the probability
concept implies the notion of "possible cases", and so it also implies a pre-defined knowledge of
systems' properties. However, the non-commutative logical structure here outlined does not
provide any cogent indication on probability usage.
Therefore, it would be proper to look at a fuzzy approach so to describe the measurement acts.
We can state that given a generic system endowed with high logical openness and an indefinite set
of properties able of describing it, each of them will belong to the system in a variable degree.
Such viewpoint expressing the famous theorem of fuzzy "subsetness" – also known as "the whole
into the part" principle – could seem to be too strong , indeed it is nothing else than the most
natural expression of the actual scientific praxis facing intrinsic emergent systems.

At the

beginning, we have at our disposal indefinite information progressively structuring thanks to the
feedback between models and measurements. It can be shown that any logically open model of
degree n – where n

is an integer – will let a wide range of properties and propositions

indeterminate (the Qs in fig. 2).The above-mentioned model is a "static" approximation of a
process showing aspects of variable closeness and openness. The latter ones varies in time,
intensity, different levels and context. It is remarkable pointing out how such systems are "flexible"
and context-sensitive, change the rules and make use of "contradictions" . This point has to be
stressed to understand the link between fuzzy logic and quantum languages. By increasing the
logical openness and the unsharp properties of a system, it will be less and less fit to be described
by a Boolean logic. It brings as a consequence that for a complex system the intersection between
a set (properties, propositions) and its complement is not equal to the empty set, but it includes
they both in a fuzzy sense. So we get a polyvalent semantic situation which is well fitted for being
described by a quantum language. As for our systemic goal it is the probabilistic interpretation to
be useless, so we are going to build a fuzzy acception of the semantics of the formalism. In our

8

case, given a system S and a property Q,, let Ψ be a function which associates Q to S, the
expression ΨS (Q ) ∈ [0,1] has not to be meant as a probability value, but as a degree of
membership. Such union between the non-commutative sides of quantum languages and fuzzy
polyvalence appears to be the most suitable and fecund for systemics.
Let us consider the traditional expression of quantum coherence (the property expressing the
QM global and non-local characteristics, i.e. superposition principle, uncertainty, interference of
probabilities), Ψ = a1Ψ1 + a 2 Ψ2 . In the fuzzy interpretation, it means that the properties Ψ1 e Ψ2
belong to Ψ with degrees of membership a1 e a 2 respectively. In other words, for complex
systems the Schrödinger's cat can be simultaneously both alive and dead ! Indeed the recent
experiments with SQUIDs and the other ones investigating the so-called macroscopic quantum
states suggest a form of macro-realism quite close to our fuzzy acception (Leggett, 1980; Chiatti,
Cini, Serva, 1995). It can provide in nuce an hint which could show up to be interesting for the QM
old-questioned interpretative problems.
In general, let x be a position coordinate of a quantum object and Ψ its wave function,

Ψ ( x ) dV is usually meant as the probability of finding the particle in a region dV of space. On the
2

contrary, in the fuzzy interpretation we will be compelled to look at the Ψ square modulus as the
degree of membership of the particle to the region dV of space. How unusual it may seem, such
idea has not to be regarded thoughtlessly at. As a matter of fact, in Quantum Field Theory and in
other more advanced quantum scenarios, a particle is not only a localized object in the space, but
rather an event emerging from the non-local networks elementary quantum transition (Licata,
2003a). Thus, the measurement is a "defuzzification" process which, according to the stated,
reduces the system ambiguity by limiting the semantic space and by defining a fixed information
quantity.
If we agree with such interpretation we will easily and immediately realize that we will able to
observate quantum coherence behaviours in non-quantum and quite far from the range of Plank's
h constant situations. We reconsider here a situation owed to Yuri Orlov (Orlov, 1997).

9

Let us consider a Riemann's sphere (Dirac, 1947) – see fig. 3 - and let assume that each point
on the sphere represents a single interpretation of a given situation, i.e. the assigning of a
coherent set of truth-values to a given proposition. Alternatively, we can consider the choosing of
a vector v from the centre O to a point on the sphere as a logical definition of a world. If we
choose a different direction, associated to a different vector w , we can now set the problem about
the meaning of the amplitude between the logical descriptions of the two worlds. It is known that
such amplitude is expressed by

1 (1 + cos θ ) , where θ is the angle between the two
2

interpretations. The amplitude corresponds to a superposition of worlds, so producing the typical
interference patterns which in vectorial terms are related to w . In this case, the traditional use of

v

probability is not necessary because our knowledge of one of the two world with probability equal
to p =1 (certainity), say nothing us about the other one probability. An interpretation is not a
quantum object in the proper sense, and yet we are forced to formally introduce a wave-function
and interference terms whose role is very obscure a one. The fuzzy approach, instead, clarifies
the quantum semantics of this situation by interpreting interference as a measurement where the
properties of the world v Ψv + w Ψw

are owed to the global and indissoluble (non-local)

contribution of the v and w overlapping.
In conclusion, the generalized using of quantum semantics associated to new interpretative
possibilities gives to systemics a very powerful tool to describe the observator-environment relation
and to convey the several, partial attempts - till now undertaken - of applying
formalism to the study of complex systems into a comprehensive conceptual root.

10

the quantum

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special thank to Prof. G. Minati for his kindness and his supporting during this paper drafting. I
owe a lot to the useful discussing on structural Quantum Mechanics and logics with my good
friends Prof. Renato Nobili (who let me use the figs. 1 and 2 from his book "Dai Quark alla Mente",
to be published) and Prof. Eliano Pessa. Dedicated to M.V.

REFERENCES
Abram, M.R.,2002, Decomposition of Systems, in Emergence in Complex, Cognitive, Social and
Biological Systems ,( G. Minati and E.Pessa eds.), Kluwer Academic, NY, 2002.
Baas, N. A. and Emmeche , C., 1997, On Emergence and Explanation, in SFI Working Paper,
Santa Fé Inst., 97-02-008.
Birkhoff, G. and von Neumann J., 1936, The Logic of Quantum Mechanics, in Annals of Math.,37.
Cariani, P., 1991, Adaptivity and Emergence in Organism and Devices, in World Futures, 32( 111).
Cattaneo, G., Dalla Chiara, M.L.,Giuntini, R., 1993, Fuzzy-Intuitionistic Quantum Logics, in Studia
Logica, 52.
Chiatti, L., Cini M., Serva, M., 1995, Is Macroscopic Quantum Coherence Incompatibile with
Macroscopic Realism? In Nuovo Cim., 110B (5-6).
Collen, A., 2002, Disciplinarity in the Pursuit of Knowledge, in Emergence in Complex, Cognitive,
Social and Biological Systems ( G. Minati and E.Pessa eds.), Kluwer Academic, NY, 2002.
Dalla Chiara, M.L. and Giuntini R, 1995, The Logic of Orthoalgebras, in Studia Logica, 55.
Dirac,P.A.M., 1947, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 3rd ed., Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Feynman, R. P., 1982, Simulating Physics with Computers, in Int. J. of Theor. Phys., 21(6/7).
Griffiths, R. B., 1995, Consistent Quantum Reasoning, in arXiv :quant-ph/9505009 v1.
Gudder, S.P.,1988, Quantum Probability, Academic Press, NY.
Heisenberg W., 1958, Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science .Harper and
Row, NY ; Prometheus Books; Reprint edition 1999.
Heylighen, F., 1990, Classical and Non-Classical Representations in Physics: Quantum
Mechanics, in Cybernetics and Systems 21.
Klir, J. G., (ed), 1991, Facets of Systems Science, Plenum Press, NY.
Kosko, B., 1990, Fuzziness vs. Probability, in Int. J. Of General Systems, 17(2).
Legget, A. J., 1980, Macroscopic Quantum Systems and the Quantum Theory of Measurement,in
Suppl.Prog.Theor.Phys., 69(80).
Licata, I., 2003a, Osservando la sfinge. La realtà virtuale della fisica quantistica, Di Renzo, Roma.

11

Licata,I., 2003b, Mente & Computazione, in Sistema Naturae, Annali di Biologia Teorica,5.
Mamdani, E.H., 1977, Application of Fuzzy Logic to Approximate Reasoning Using Linguistic
Synthesis, in IEEE Trans. on Computers, C26.
Minati G and Brahms S., 2002, The Dynamic Usage of Models (DYSAM), in Emergence in
Complex, Cognitive,

Social and Biological Systems ( G. Minati and E.Pessa eds.), Kluwer

Academic, NY, 2002.
Minati, G., Pessa, E., Penna, M. P., 1998, Thermodynamical and Logical Openness in Systems
Research and Behavioral Science, 15(3).
Orlov, Y.F., 1997, Quantum-Type Coherence as a Combination of Symmetry and Semantics, in
arXiv:quant-ph/9705049 v1.
Piron, C.,1964, Axiomatique Quantique, in Helvetica Physica Acta, 37.
Rossi- Landi, F, 1985, Metodica filosofica e scienza dei segni, Bompiani, Milano.
Volkenshtein, M.V.,1988, Complementary,Physics and Biology in Soviet Phys. Uspekhi 31.
Von Bertalanffy, 1968, General System Theory, Braziller, NY.
Zadeh, L.A., 1965, Fuzzy Sets, in Information and Control , 8.
Zadeh, L. A. , 1987, Fuzzy Sets and Applications:Selected Papers by L.A. Zadeh, R.R Yager, R.M
Tong, S. Ovchnikov H.T Nguyen (eds.) , Wiley, NY.
Wiener, N., 1961, Cybernetics : or control and communication in the animal ed the machine, MIT
Press, Cambridge.

12

