SOME NEW EXPERIMENTAL PHOTONIC FLAME EFFECT
FEATURES
N.V.Tcherniega
P.N.Lebedev Physical Institute, RAS
Leninskii pr., 53, 119991, Moscow, Russia
tchera@sci.lebedev.ru

Abstract
The results of the spectral, energetical and temporal characteristics of radiation in the
presence of the photonic flame effect are presented. Artificial opal posed on Cu plate at the
temperature of liquid nitrogen boiling point (77 K) being irradiated by nanosecond ruby laser
pulse produces long- term luminiscence with a duration till ten seconds with a finely structured
spectrum in the the antistocks part of the spectrum. Analogous visible luminescence manifesting
time delay appeared in other samples of the artificial opals posed on the same plate. In the case
of the opal infiltrated with different nonlinear liquids the threshold of the luminiscence is
reduced and the spatial disribution of the bright emmiting area on the opal surface is being
changed. In the case of the putting the frozen nonlinear liquids on the Cu plate long-term blue
bright luminiscence took place in the frozen species of the liquids. Temporal characteristics of
this luminiscence are nearly the same as in opal matrixes.
Keywords: photonic flame effect, optical luminescence, excitation, artificial opal, spectrum

1. Introduction
In [1-3] new effect called photonic flame effect was found and some its properties were
studied. This effect is determined by properties of photonic crystals.
Photonic crystals have attracted great attention since the first papers concerning such
structures [4-6]. One of the most important photonic crystals are artificial opals – self –
assembled structures composed of SiO2 spheres organizing face-centered cubic lattice. The size
of such spheres varying between 200 nm and 400 nm and defines the parameters of the facecentered cubic lattice and the photonic bandgap. The possibility of opal infiltration with different
medium gives rise to effective processing the properties of the light propogating through the
crystal. The voids in the opal structures can be filled with semiconductors, superconductors,
ferromagnetic materials, fluorescent medium [7] and this fact gives large possibility to practical
applications of such structures for optoelectronics. The study of the linear optical properties of
the photonic band gap have been the task of many theoretical and experimental works and still
remain the task to be investigated [7,8]. The theoretical description of the electromagnetic field
inside the photonic crystal structures (obtained by transfer matrix method [9] or coupled mode
theory [10]) gives the clear picture of the transmitted and reflected spectrum, electromagnetic
field distribution inside the crystal and their dependence on the parameters of the photonic
crystal structure (values of period, number of periods, refractive index contrast). Large values of
the electromagnetic field localization in some regions lead to the expectation of the strong
enhancement of nonlinear wave-matter interaction in comparison with bulk crystals. Second
harmonic generation in different types of photonic crystals was investigated in [11,12]. Properly
chosen photonic crystal exhibits negative refraction at some conditions [13]. Some features of
the stimulated Raman scattering in one-dimensional photonic structure were considered in [14].
Fully quantum mechanical treatment of the generation of entangled photon in nonlinear photonic
crystals at the process of down-conversion was realized in [15]. Photonic band gap properties
which are demonstrated by photonic crystalls are being actively used for investigation of
photon-exciton interaction [16]. Acoustic modes excited in SiO2 balls which compose opal
photonic crystal show the effect of phonon modes quantization [17] and are the reason of
stimulated globular scattering [3]. Specific features of the acoustic wave propagation in the
photonic structures lead to the possibility of the diverging ultrasonic beam focusing into a

narrow focal spot with a large focal depth [18]. Optical parametric oscillations via four-wave
mixing in isotropic photonic crystals showes the possibility of the effective frequency processing
[19].
The aim of this work is to give a short review of results [1-3] and to study collective behavior
of several photonic crystals. The crystals are posed on Cu plate at the temperature of liquid
nitrogen. One of the photonic crystals is illuminated by laser pulse and the laser light is focused
on this only crystal. The phenomenon which we observe is the appearance of luminescence of
other photonic crystals. The duration of the luminescence of other crystals which are spatially
separated with the crystal illuminated by laser pulse is of the order of seconds. The appearance of
the luminescence takes place with some time delay respectively to the laser pulse. The form of
these light spots on the other crystals and their slow motions along the crystal reminds a small
flame spot. This inspired us to give the "photonic flame" name to the observed effect. In the case
of covering the surface of the Cu plate with liquid (acetone, ethanol, water) after the PFE
excitation in the opal situated on this plate blue luminescence is being seen in the frozen liquid.
The temporal characteristics of this luminescence are the sme as for single opal crystal. The
paper is organized as follows. In Sec.2 the experimental setup, laser, the photonic crystals
(artificial opals) used in the experiment are described. In Sec.3 the "photonic flame effect"
observed in the experiment is discussed. In Sec.4 perspectives and possible explanations are
presented.

2. Photonic crystals and laser used in experiment.
One of the most promising three-dimensional photonic crystals is artificial opal. Opal is a
crystal with face-centered cubic lattice consisting of the monodisperse close packed SiO2 spheres
with diameter about several hundred nanometers. Because the refractive index contrast (ratio
nSiO2/nair) is about 1,45 the complete photonic band gap does not exist but the photonic
pseudogap takes place. Empty cavities among these globules have octahedral and tetrahedral
form. It is possible to investigate both initial opals (opal matrices) and nanocomposites, in which
cavities are filled with organic or inorganic materials, for instance, semiconductors,
superconductors, ferromagnetic substances, dielectrics, displaying different types of

Fig.1. Common appearance of a globular photonic crystal, built of spherical particles (globules)
nonlinearities and so on. Filling voids of the photonic crystal with materials with different
refraction index one can effectively process the parameters of the photonic pseudogap.
Ruby laser giant pulse (λ=694.3 nm, τ=20 ns, Emax =0.3 J, spectral width of the initial light 0.015 cm-1.) has been used as a source of excitation. Exciting light has been focused on the
material by lenses with different focal lengths (50, 90, and 150 mm). The samples of opal
crystals used had the size 3x5x5mm and were cut parallel to the plane (111) (see Fig.2) .The
angle of the incidence of the laser beam on the plane (111) varied from 0 to 600. Sample
distance from focusing system and exciting light energy were different in different runs of the
experiment. This gave possibility to make measurements for different power density at the

entrance of the sample and for different field distribution inside the sample. Opal crystals
consisting of the close-packed amorphose spheres with diameter 200 nm, 230 nm, 250 nm and
nanocomposites (opal crystals with voids filled with acetone or ethanol) were investigated.

z

θ

y

[111]

x

Fig.2. The scheme of illuminating the sample. Plane XY correspondes to the CU plate surface.

3.Characteristics of "photonic flame"
Opal crystals were placed on the Cu plate which was put into the cell with liquid nitrogen (see
Fig.3). The number of crystals varied from 1 to 5. The distance (d) betwen the crystals was of the
order of several centimeters (maximum value of d was 5 centimeters and was determined by the
Cu plate size). One of the crystals was illuminated by the focused laser pulse. In the case of the
reaching of the threshold visible (blue) luminescence appeared. The luminescence duration was
from 1 to 12 seconds and it looked like inhomogeneous spot changing its spatial distribution and
position on the surface of the crystal during this time.

liquid N2
opal

opal
exciting light

d
opal

Fig.3. Experimental setup.

Cu

Parameters of the luminescence (duration, threshold) were determined by the geometric
characteristic of the illumination and the refractive index contrast of the sample. For optimal
geometry of the excitation the power density threshold for opal crystal was 0.12 Gw/cm2, for
opal crystals filled with ethanol – 0.05 Gw/cm2, for opal crystal filled with acetone - 0,03
Gw/cm2. Typical luminescence temporal distribution measured for the part of the crystal
displaying the most intensive brightness is shown on Fig.4. The same behavior is typical for all
cases of the luminescence at these conditions of excitation, but the value of the luminescence
duration fluctuated from shoot to shoot.

a)

b)

Fig.4. Temporal distribution of the visible luminiscence.
The duration of the luminiscence fluctuated from 1 till 12 seconds and demonstrated
oscillating structure. In some cases the temporal distribution had maximum at the beginning of
the luminiscence in some cases – minimum. Fig.4 a) and b) show the luminiscence of the pure
opal matrix of the nearly the same duration at the same geometrical and energetical conditions of
excitation near the threshold of excitation (0.12 Gw/cm2 ). The beginning of the mesurements
corresponds to 0.3 s delay after the laser shoot (laser pulse duration is 20 ns).
Secondary emission spectrum observed in photonic flame effect has been investigated with
the help of setup shown at the Fig.5.
12
11

10
9
8
1

3
6

4

2

7

Fig. 5.The experimental setup for PPE spectrum study. 1- ruby laser; 2- lens; 3, 4, 5 – photonic
crystals; 7 – cell with liquid nitrogen 6 – Cu plate; 8 – fiber wave guide; 9 – minipolychromator;
10 – computer; 11 – camera; 12 – computer.

Spectra of the light emitted by photonic crystal for different pumping light power density are
shown at the Fig. 6 (a and b)

4000

489

2000

I, a.u.

I, a.u.

4000

643

2000

453
429

555

486

0

0

200

300

400

500

600

λ, nm

a

700

800

900

1000

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

1100

λ, nm

b

Fig. 6. Secondary emission spectrum of a photonic crystal for different laser light power density:
a - I = 0.12 GW/cm2, b - I = 0.14 GW/cm2.
Spectrum consisted of the sharp lines with wavelengths: 429.0, 453.0, 489.0, 555.0, 643.0 nm,
which corresponds to the antistokes spectral range for exciting line 694.3 nm. Lines intensity in
the spectrum strongly depended on the laser pumping intensity, which was evidence of
stimulated type of the radiation emission.
In the case of several crystals placed on the Cu plate only one of them was irradiated by the
laser pulse. Luminescence took place in this crystal in the case of the threshold reaching. Bright
shining of the other crystals began with some time delay after laser shoot. The value of this delay
(and the intensity of the luminiscence) was determined by the spatial position of the crystals on
the plate. The steal screen beeing put between the crystals (in order to avoid irradiating of the
crystals by the light scattered by the crystal excited by the laser) did not stop the appearing of the
luminescence if the distance between the Cu plate and the screen was more than 0.5 mm. The
duration of the luminiscence was of the order of several seconds and temporal behavior was like
shown on Fig.4. The typical features of such distribution were existence of maximum and large
plato with near constant value of the intensity.
In order to show the role of the material of the plate used we repeated these measurements
with plates of the same size but made from steel and quarz on which opal crystals were placed
like in the previous experiments. Luminescence of the same kind in the irradiated crystal took
place but the luminescence of the other samples situated on these plates was not observed.
The effect was also determined by the angle of incidence (Fig.2). For the samples used the
value of the angle was chosen experimentally for achieving of the maximal value of the
luminescence (it worth to mention that this value differed from 0 and was about 400). Easier the
effect was excited in the unprocessed samples. In Fig.5 one can see the luminescence of the
crystals situated at the distance of about 1 centimeter from the crystal which was irradiated.

Fig.7 Visible luminiscence of
irradiated crystal can be seen
center, on the right picture it
where crystals are infiltrated
crystals without infiltration.

the opal crystals in the case of the irradiating one of them (the
by bright red light; on the left picture it was the crystal in the
was the crystal on the left). Left picture corresponds to the case
by acetone. Right picture corresponds to the case of the opal

In the case of the large laser energy (several times more the threshold) or if the crystal was
irradiated by several laser pulses the opal can be destroyed and the parts of the crystal produce
the luminiscence with the spectral and temporal properties described above (Fig.8).

Fig.8 Opal crystal is destroyed and 3 large pieces and several little pieces are going on to
produce the luminescence.
In order to clarify the role of the Cu plate surface on the energy transport between the
crystals the next experiment was realized: the pure opal matrix posed on the Cu plate was
irradiated by the ruby laser pulse and demonstrated strong luminescence lasting few seconds
with the properties described above (Fig.9)

Fig.9 Luminiscence of the single opal matrix

Next step was covering the surface of the Cu plate with the liquid (experiments were made
with water, aceton or ethanol). The thickness of the frozen liquid on the plate surface was about
1 mm. The transverse size of the frozen liquid was about 1 cm. After illuminating of the crystal
by the ruby laser pulse the luminiscence of the crystal appears the bright blue luminiscence of
the frozen species of the liquid used appears. The temporal characteristics of the luminiscence in
crystal and in the frozen liquid are approximatly the same (the luminiscence duration is about
several seconds). The luminiscence of the frozen liquid goes on in spite on the putting the screen
between the crystal and the liquid. It shows that the luminiscence of the liquid is not a reflection
of the light which is emmited by the crystal. Fig.10 shows the luminiscence of the crystal and the
frozen liquid (in this case it was water). The pictures were made with the interval of 1 second
between each other. Analogous behaviour is demonstrated by aceton and ethanol. The
luminiscence of the area covered with frozen liquid takes place even if this area is at the distance
of several cantimeters from the irradiated crystal.The explanation of the blue luminiscence of the
frozen liquid can be done in several ways and for clarifying the reasons of this luminescence
appearance it is necessary to produce additional experiments. The intensity of the laser in the
experiments is about 0.12 Gw/cm2, and the large enhancement of this field due to Mie –
resonance [20] simultaniously with the interference effect caused by the structure of the opal
matrix can lead to the extremely large field enhancement which can play an important role in this
effect.

Fig.10 Luminiscence of the opal matrix (bright round spot) and frozen liquid (large blue spot)
on the surface of the Cu plate.

4. Conclusions.
In this paper we reported about some new features of the photonic flame effect. The main
features of PFE are:
- At the excitation of the artificial opal crystal which is placed on the Cu plate at the
temperature of the liquid nitrogen by the ruby laser pulse of the nanosecond range long-

-

-

continued optical luminescence takes place in the case if the threshold of the process
is
reached;
In the case of several opal crystals being put on the Cu plate while one of them is being
irradiated bright visible luminescence occurs in all samples;
Temporal behavior and thresholds of the luminescence have been determined. Photonic
crystals infiltrated with different nonlinear liquids and without infiltration have been
investigated. Investigated transport of the excitation between the samples spatially separated
by the length of several centimeters gives the possibility of the practical applications of
PFE;
The blue luminiscence of the frozen liquid on the surface of the Cu plate takes place at the
precense of the photonic flame effect;

The photonic flame effect can have different explanation. Probably an essential role is played
by plasma properties. The slow transport of the excitations from the irradiated crystal to other
photonic crystals can be associated with sound waves created due to laser pulse interaction with
the sample. Exciton mechanism and surface waveguides on the surface of the Cu plate also can
play important role. It was checked that the change of the properties of the plate surface was
leading to change of the photonic flame effect. Removing the oxid layer from the plate changed
the threshold PFE. The luminescence of the frozen liquids on the surface of the Cu plate showes
the important role of the electromagnetic field enhancement due to Mie resonance and Bragg
diffraction on the photonic crystal lattice. The electromagnetic field enhancement can lead to
producing laser plasma, electron acceleration and x-ray production.

References
1. N.V.Tcherniega, A.D.Kudryavtseva, ArXiv Physics/ 0608150 (2006).
2. N.V.Tcherniega, A.D.Kudryavtseva, Journal of Russian Laser Research, V.27, N 5, стр.400409 (2006).
3.A.A.Esakov, V.S.Gorelik, A.D.Kudryavtseva, M.V.Tareeva and N.V.Tcherniega, SPIE
Proceedings, V 6369, 6369 OE1 - 6369 OE12, Photonic Crystals and Photonic Crystal Fibers for

Sensing Applications II; Henry H. Du, Ryan Bise; Eds, (Oct.2006).
4.P. Bykov, J. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 35, 269, (1972).
5.E.Yablonovich, Phys. Rev. Lett.,58, 2059 (1987).
6.S.John , Phys. Rev. Lett., 58, 2486, (1987).
7.V. N. Astratov, V. N. Bogomolov, A. A. Kaplyanskii, A. V. Prokofiev, L. A. Samoilovich, S.
M. Samoilovich, Yu. A. Vlasov, Nuovo Cimento, D 17,1349 (1995).
8.A. V. Baryshev, A. A. Kaplyanskii, V. A. Kosobukin, M. F. Limonov, K. B. Samsuev,
Fiz.Tverd.Tela, 45, 434 (2003), in Russian.
9.M. Born, E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Macmillan, New York (1964)
10.A. Yariv, Quantum Electronics, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, London, Sudneu
(1967).
11.M. G. Martemyanov, D. G. Gusev, I. V. Soboleva, T.V. Dolgova, A. A. Fedyanin, O. A.
Akstipetrov, and G. Marovsky, Laser Physics, 14, 677 (2004).
12.A. A. Fedyanin, O. A. Aktsipetrov, D. A. Kurdyukov, V. G. Golubev, M. Inoue,
Appl.Phys.Letters, 87, 151111 (2005).
13.Foteinopoulou, E.N.Economou, C.M.Soukoulis, Phys.Rev.Let., 90 , 107402, (2003).

14.R. G. Zaporozhchenko, S. Ya. Kilin, A. G. Smirnov, Quantum Electronics, 30, 997 (2000), in
Russian.
15.W. T. M. Irvine, M. J. A. de Dood, D. Bouwmeester, Phys Rev.A 72, 043815 (2005).
16.N. A. Gippius, S. G. Tihodeev, A. Christ, J. Kuhl, H. Giessen, Fiz. Tverd. Tela, 47, 139
(2005).
17.M.H.Kuok, H.S.Lim, S.C.NG, N.N.Liu, Z.K.Wang, Phys.Rev.Let., 90 , 255502, (2003).
18. Suxia Yang, J.H.Page, Zhengyou Liu, M.L.Cowan, C.T.Chan, Ping Sheng, Phys.Rev.Let., 93
, 024301, (2004).
19.Claudio Conti, Andrea Di Falco, Gaetano Assantom, Optics Express, 12, 823, (2004).
20.G.Mie, Ann.Phys.,(Berlin), 25, 377,(1908)

