T HE A STROPHYSICAL J OURNAL S UPPLEMENT S ERIES , submitted [e-print arXiv:0704.0044]
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 08/22/09

ASTROPHYSICAL GYROKINETICS: KINETIC AND FLUID TURBULENT CASCADES IN MAGNETIZED WEAKLY
COLLISIONAL PLASMAS
A. A. S CHEKOCHIHIN , 1 S. C. C OWLEY, 1,2,3 W. D ORLAND , 4 G. W. H AMMETT, 5 G. G. H OWES , 6,7 E. Q UATAERT, 6

AND

T. TATSUNO 4

arXiv:0704.0044v2 [astro-ph] 24 May 2008

DRAFT VERSION July 11, 2013

ABSTRACT
This paper presents a theoretical framework for understanding plasma turbulence in astrophysical plasmas. It
is motivated by observations of electromagnetic and density fluctuations in the solar wind, interstellar medium
and galaxy clusters, as well as by models of particle heating in accretion disks. All of these plasmas and many
others have turbulent motions at weakly collisional and collisionless scales. The paper focuses on turbulence
in a strong mean magnetic field. The key assumptions are that the turbulent fluctuations are anisotropic with
respect to the mean field and that their frequency is low compared to the ion cyclotron frequency. The turbulence is assumed to be forced at some system-specific outer scale. The energy injected at this scale has to be
dissipated into heat, which ultimately cannot be accomplished without collisions. A kinetic cascade develops
that brings the energy to collisional scales both in space and velocity. The nature of the kinetic cascade in various scale ranges depends on the physics of plasma fluctuations that exist there. There are four special scales
that separate physically distinct regimes: the electron and ion gyroscales, the mean free path and the electron
diffusion scale. In each of the scale ranges separated by these scales, the fully kinetic problem is systematically
reduced to a more physically transparent and computationally tractable system of equations, which are derived
in a rigorous way. In the "inertial range" above the ion gyroscale, the kinetic cascade separates into two parts:
a cascade of Alfvénic fluctuations and a passive cascade of density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations.
The former are governed by the Reduced Magnetohydrodynamic (RMHD) equations at both the collisional
and collisionless scales; the latter obey a linear kinetic equation along the (moving) field lines associated with
the Alfvénic component (in the collisional limit, these compressive fluctuations become the slow and entropy
modes of the conventional MHD). In the "dissipation range" between the ion and electron gyroscales, there
are again two cascades: the kinetic-Alfvén-wave (KAW) cascade governed by two fluid-like Electron Reduced
Magnetohydrodynamic (ERMHD) equations and a passive cascade of ion entropy fluctuations both in space
and velocity. The latter cascade brings the energy of the inertial-range fluctuations that was damped by collisionless wave-particle interaction at the ion gyroscale to collisional scales in the phase space and leads to
ion heating. The KAW energy is similarly damped at the electron gyroscale and converted into electron heat.
Kolmogorov-style scaling relations are derived for all of these cascades. The relationship between the theoretical models proposed in this paper and astrophysical applications and observations is discussed in detail.
Subject headings: magnetic fields-methods: analytical-MHD-plasmas-turbulence
1. INTRODUCTION

As observations of velocity, density and magnetic fields in
astrophysical plasmas probe ever smaller scales, turbulence-
i.e., broad-band disordered fluctuations usually characterized
by power-law energy spectra-emerges as a fundamental and
ubiquitous feature. A property that recurs in these measurements so often that it is sometimes (erroneously) thought of
as synonymous with turbulence is the k−5/3 energy spectrum,
known as the Kolmogorov spectrum.
One of the earliest appearances of this spectrum in astrophysics was its detection for the magnetic fluctuations in the
Electronic address: a.schekochihin@imperial.ac.uk
1 Plasma Physics, Blackett Laboratory,
Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-1547.
3 Current address: EURATOM/UKAEA Fusion Association, Culham
Science Centre, Abington OX14 3DB, UK.
4 Department of Physics, CSCAMM and IREAP, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD 20742-3511.
5 Princeton University Plasma Physics Laboratory, P. O. Box 451, Princeton, NJ 08543-0451.
6 Department of Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720-3411.
7 Current address: Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242-1479.

solar wind over a frequency range of about three decades
(Matthaeus & Goldstein 1982; Bavassano et al. 1982). A
multitude of subsequent observations have confirmed this
behaviour of the magnetic fluctuations to a high degree
of accuracy (e.g., Marsch & Tu 1990a; Horbury et al. 1996;
Leamon et al. 1998). It has also been found that the spectrum
of the fluctuations of the electric field (and, by implication, of
the E × B velocity field) follows very closely the spectrum of
magnetic fluctuations (Bale et al. 2005, see Fig. 1).
Another famous example in which the Kolmogorov power
law appears to hold is the electron density spectrum in the
interstellar medium (ISM)-in this case it emerges from observations by various methods in several scale intervals and,
when these are pieced together, the power law famously extends over as many as 12 decades of scales (Armstrong et al.
1981, 1995; Lazio et al. 2004), a record that has earned it the
name of "the Great Power Law in the Sky." Numerous other
measurements in space and astrophysical plasmas, from the
magnetosphere to galaxy clusters, result in Kolmogorov (or
consistent with Kolmogorov) spectra-some of these are discussed in § 8.
Besides being one of the more easily measurable characteristics of the multiscale nature of turbulence, power law
(and, particularly, Kolmogorov) spectra evoke (although do

2

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

not prove!) a number of fundamental physical ideas that lie at
the heart of the turbulence theory: universality of small-scale
physics, energy cascade, locality of interactions, etc. As in
this paper we shall revisit these ideas in the context of kinetic
plasma turbulence, it is perhaps useful to remind the reader
how they emerge in a standard argument that leads to the k−5/3
spectrum (Kolmogorov 1941; Obukhov 1941).
1.1. Kolmogorov Turbulence
Suppose the average energy per unit time per unit volume
that the system dissipates is ε. This energy has to be transferred from some (large) outer scale L at which it is injected
to some (small) inner scale(s) at which the dissipation occurs
(see § 1.5). It is assumed that in the range of scales intermediate between the outer and the inner (the inertial range), the
statistical properties of the turbulence are universal (independent of the macrophysics of injection or of the microphysics
of dissipation), spatially homogeneous and isotropic and the
energy transfer is local in scale space. If we are dealing with a
neutral incompressible fluid, its properties are fully described
by the velocity field. The flux of kinetic energy through any
inertial-range scale λ is independent of λ:

u2λ
∼ ε = const,
τλ

(1)

where the (constant) density of the medium is absorbed into
ε, uλ is the typical velocity fluctuation associated with the
scale λ, and τλ is the cascade time (this is the version of Kolmogorov's theory due to Obukhov 1941). Since interactions
are assumed local, τλ must be expressed in terms of quantities
associated with scale λ. It is then dimensionally inevitable
that τλ ∼ λ/uλ (the nonlinear interaction time, or turnover
time), so we get
uλ ∼ (ελ)1/3 .

This corresponds to a k

−5/3

(2)

spectrum of kinetic energy.

1.2. MHD Turbulence

That astronomical data appears to point to a universal nature of what, in its origin, is a dimensional result for the turbulence in a neutral fluid, might appear surprising. Indeed, the
astrophysical plasmas in question are highly conducting and
support magnetic fields whose energy is at least comparable
to the kinetic energy of the motions. Let us consider a situation where the plasma is threaded by a uniform dynamically
strong magnetic field B0 (the mean, or guide, field; see § 1.3
for a brief discussion of the validity of this assumption). In
the presence of such a field, there is no dimensionally unique
way of determining the cascade time τλ because besides the
nonlinear interaction time λ/uλ , there is a second characteristic time associated with the fluctuation of size λ, namely the
Alfvén time lkλ /vA , where vA is the Alfvén speed and lkλ is
the typical scale of the fluctuation along the magnetic field.
The first theories of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence (Iroshnikov 1963; Kraichnan 1965; Dobrowolny et al.
1980) calculated τλ by assuming an isotropic cascade (lkλ ∼
λ) of weakly interacting Alfvén-wave packets (τλ ≫ lkλ /vA )
and obtained a k−3/2 spectrum. The failure of the observed spectra to conform to this law (see references above)
and especially the observational (see references at the end
of this subsection) and experimental (Robinson & Rusbridge
1971; Zweben et al. 1979) evidence of anisotropy of MHD

F IG . 1.- Spectra of electric and magnetic fluctuations in the solar wind
at 1 AU (see Table 1 for the solar wind parameters corresponding to this
plot). This figure is adapted with permission from Fig. 3 of Bale et al. (2005)
(copyright 2005 by the American Physical Society). We have added the
reference slopes for Alfvén-wave and kinetic-Alfvén-wave turbulence in
bold dashed (red) lines and labeled "KRMHD," "GK ions," and "ERMHD"
the wave-number intervals where these analytical descriptions are valid (see
§ 3, § 5 and § 7).

fluctuations led to the isotropy assumption being discarded
(Montgomery & Turner 1981).
The modern form of MHD turbulence theory is commonly
associated with the names of Goldreich & Sridhar (1995,
1997, henceforth, GS). It can be summarized as follows. Assume that (a) all electromagnetic perturbations are strongly
anisotropic, so that their characteristic scales along the mean
field are much smaller than those across it, lkλ ≫ λ, or, in
terms of wavenumbers, kk ≪ k⊥ ; (b) the interactions between
the Alfvén-wave packets are strong and the turbulence at sufficiently small scales always arranges itself in such a way that
the Alfvén time scale and the perpendicular nonlinear interaction time scale are comparable to each other, i.e.,
ω ∼ kk vA ∼ k⊥ u ⊥ ,

(3)

where ω is the typical frequency of the fluctuations and u⊥ is
the velocity fluctuation perpendicular to the mean field. Taken
scale by scale, this assumption, known as the critical balance,
gives lkλ /vA ∼ λ/u⊥λ and the dimensional ambiguity of the
MHD turbulence theory is removed. It is then reasonable to
take the cascade time to be the same as the Alfvén time, τλ ∼
lkλ /vA , whence
uλ ∼ (εlkλ /vA )1/2 ∼ (ελ)1/3 ,

1/3
lkλ ∼ l0 λ2/3 ,

(4)
(5)

where l0 = v3A /ε. The scaling relation (4) is equivalent to a
−5/3
k⊥ spectrum of kinetic energy, while Eq. (5) quantifies the
anisotropy by establishing the relation between the perpendicular and parallel scales. Note that the first scaling relation in
Eq. (4) implies that in terms of the parallel wave numbers, the
kinetic-energy spectrum is ∼ kk−2 .
The fluctuations are Alfvénic, √so the typical magnetic
field fluctuation is δB⊥λ ∼ u⊥λ 4πρ0 , where ρ0 is the
mean density (see Fig. 1 and discussion in § 8.1.1). Other
MHD modes-slow waves and the entropy mode-turn

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
out to be passively advected by the Alfvénic component
of the turbulence (this follows from the anisotropy; see
Lithwick & Goldreich 2001, and §§ 2.4-2.6, § 5.5, and § 6.3
for further discussion of the passive component of MHD turbulence).
As we have mentioned above, the anisotropy was, in
fact, incorporated into MHD turbulence theory already by
Montgomery & Turner (1981). However, these authors' view
differed from the GS theory in that they thought of MHD
turbulence as essentially two-dimensional, described by a
Kolmogorov-like cascade (Fyfe et al. 1977), with an admixture of Alfvén waves having some spectrum in kk unrelated
to the perpendicular structure of the turbulence (note that
Higdon 1984, while adopting a similar view, anticipated the
scaling relation (5), but did not seem to consider it to be anything more than the confirmation of an essentially 2D nature
of the turbulence). In what we are referring to here as GS
turbulence, the 2D and Alfvénic fluctuations are not separate components of the turbulence. The turbulence is threedimensional, with correlations parallel and perpendicular to
the (local) mean field related at each scale by the critical
balance assumption. Physically, we might argue that turbulence cannnot be any more 2D than allowed by the critical
balance because two planes perpendicular to the mean field
can only be correlated if an Alfvén wave can propagate between them in one perpendicular decorrelation time. Note
also that weakly interacting Alfén waves with fixed kk and ω =
kk vA ≫ k⊥ u⊥ can be shown to give rise to an energy cascade
towards smaller perpendicular scales where the turbulence becomes strong and Eq. (3) is satisfied (Goldreich & Sridhar
1997; Galtier et al. 2000).
We emphasize that, along with the k−5/3 scaling of the spectra, the anisotropy of astrophysical plasma turbulence is also
an observed phenomenon. It is seen most clearly in the case
of the solar wind (Belcher & Davis 1971; Matthaeus et al.
1990; Bieber et al. 1996; Dasso et al. 2005; Bigazzi et al.
2006; Sorriso-Valvo et al. 2006; Horbury et al. 2005, 2008;
Osman & Horbury 2007; Hamilton et al. 2008)-in particular, a recent solar-wind data analysis by Horbury et al. (2008)
approaches quantitative corroboration of the GS theory by
confirming the scaling of the spectrum with the parallel wave
number ∼ kk−2 that follows from the first scaling relation
in Eq. (4). Anisotropy is also observed indirectly in the
ISM (Wilkinson et al. 1994; Trotter et al. 1998; Rickett et al.
2002; Dennett-Thorpe & de Bruyn 2003), including recently
in molecular clouds (Heyer et al. 2008), and, with unambiguous consistency, in numerical simulations of MHD turbulence
(Shebalin et al. 1983; Oughton et al. 1994; Cho & Vishniac
2000; Maron & Goldreich 2001; Cho et al. 2002; Müller et al.
2003).8
8

The numerical evidence is much less clear on the scaling of the spectrum.
−5/3
−3/2
The fact that the spectrum appears closer to k⊥ than to k⊥ in numerical simulations (Maron & Goldreich 2001; Müller et al. 2003; Mason et al.
2007) prompted Boldyrev (2006) to propose a scaling argument that allows
−3/2
an anisotropic Alfvénic turbulence with a k⊥ spectrum. His argument
is based on the conjecture that the fluctuating velocity and magnetic fields
tend to partially align at small scales, an idea that has had considerable
numerical support (Maron & Goldreich 2001; Beresnyak & Lazarian 2006;
Mason et al. 2006; Matthaeus et al. 2008). The alignment weakens nonlinear interactions and alters the scalings. Another modification of the GS the−3/2
ory leading to an anisotropic k⊥ spectrum was proposed by Gogoberidze
(2007), who assumed that MHD turbulence with a strong mean field is dominated by nonlocal interactions with the outer scale. However, in both arguments, the basic assumption that the turbulence is strong is retained. This is

3

1.3. MHD Turbulence with and without a Mean Field
In the discussion above, treating MHD turbulence as turbulence of Alfvénic fluctuations depended on assuming the
presence of a mean (guide) field B0 that is strong compared to
the magnetic fluctuations, δB/B0 ∼ u/vA ≪ 1. We will also
need this assumption in the formal developments to follow
(see § 2.1, § 3.1). Is it legitimate to expect that such a spatially
regular field will be generically present? Kraichnan (1965) argued that in a generic situation in which all magnetic fields are
produced by the turbulence itself via the dynamo effect, one
could assume that the strongest field will be at the outer scale
and that this field will play the role of an (approximately) uniform guide field for the Alfvén waves in the inertial range.
Formally, this amounts to assuming that in the inertial range,

δB
≪ 1,
B0

kk L ≪ 1.

(6)

It is, however, by no means obvious that this should be true.
When a strong mean field is imposed by some external mechanism, the turbulent motions cannot bend it significantly, so
only small perturbations are possible and δB ≪ B0 . In contrast, without a strong imposed field, the energy density of the
magnetic fluctuations is at most comparable to the kineticenergy density of the plasma motions, which are then sufficiently energetic to randomly tangle the field, so δB ≫ B0 .
In the weak-mean-field case, the dynamically strong
stochastic magnetic field is a result of saturation of the
small-scale, or fluctuation, dynamo-amplification of magnetic field due to random stretching by the turbulent motions (see review by Schekochihin & Cowley 2007). The
definitive theory of this saturated state remains to be discovered. Both physical arguments and numerical evidence
(Schekochihin et al. 2004; Yousef et al. 2007) suggest that
the magnetic field in this case is organized in folded flux
sheets (or ribbons). The length of these folds is comparable to the outer scale, while the scale of the field-direction
reversals transverse to the fold is determined by the dissipation physics: in MHD with isotropic viscosity and resistivity, it is the resistive scale.9 Although Alfvén waves propagating along the folds may exist (Schekochihin et al. 2004;
Schekochihin & Cowley 2007), the presence of the smallscale direction reversals means that there is no scale-by-scale
equipartition between the velocity and magnetic fields: while
the magnetic energy is small-scale dominated due to the direction reversals,10 the kinetic energy should be contained primarily at the outer scale, with some scaling law in the inertial
range.
the main assumption that we make in this paper: the critical balance conjecture (3) is used below not as a scaling prescription but in a weaker sense of
an ordering assumption, i.e., we simply take the wave propagation terms to
be comparable to the nonlinear terms in the equations. It is not hard to show
that the results derived in what follows remain valid whether or not the alignment is present. We note that observationally, only in the solar wind does one
measure the spectra with sufficient accuracy to state that they are consistent
−5/3
−3/2
with k⊥ but not with k⊥ (see § 8.1.1).
9 In weakly collisional astrophysical plasmas, such a description is not
applicable: the field reversal scale is most probably determined by more
complicated and as yet poorly understood kinetic plasma effects; below this
scale, an Alfvénic turbulence of the kind discussed in this paper may exist
(Schekochihin & Cowley 2006).
10 See Haugen et al. (2004) for an alternative view. Note also that the
numerical evidence cited above pertains to forced simulations. In decaying
MHD turbulence simulations, the magnetic energy does indeed appear to be
at the outer scale (Biskamp & Müller 2000), so one might expect an Alfvénic
cascade deep in the inertial range.

4

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

Thus, at the current level of understanding we have to assume that there are two asymptotic regimes of MHD turbulence: anisotropic Alfvénic turbulence with δB ≪ B0 and
isotropic MHD turbulence with small-scale field reversals and
δB ≫ B0 . In this paper, we shall only discuss the first regime.
The origin of the mean field may be external (as, e.g., in the
solar wind, where it is the field of the Sun) or due to some
form of mean-field dynamo (rather than small-scale dynamo),
as usually expected for galaxies (see, e.g., Shukurov 2007).
Note finally that the condition δB ≪ B0 need not be satisfied at the outer scale and in fact is not satisfied in most space
or astrophysical plasmas, where more commonly δB ∼ B0 at
the outer scale. This, however, is sufficient for the Kraichnan hypothesis to hold and for an Alfénic cascade to be set
up, so at small scales (in the inertial range and beyond), the
assumptions (6) are satisfied.

TABLE 1
R EPRESENTATIVE PARAMETERS FOR A STROPHYSICAL P LASMAS .

1.4. Kinetic Turbulence

Thus, the GS theory of MHD turbulence (§ 1.2) allows us to
make sense of the magnetized turbulence observed in cosmic
plasmas exhibiting the same statistical scaling as turbulence
in a neutral fluid (although the underlying dynamics are very
different in these two cases!). However, there is an aspect of
the observed astrophysical turbulence that undermines the applicability of any type of fluid description: in most cases, the
inertial range where the Kolmogorov scaling holds extends to
scales far below the mean free path deep into the collisionless
regime. For example, in the case of the solar wind, the mean
free path is close to 1 AU, so all scales are collisionless-
an extreme case, which also happens to be the best studied,
thanks to the possibility of in situ measurements (see § 8.1).
The proper way of treating such plasmas is using kinetic
theory, not fluid equations. The basis for the application of the
MHD fluid description to them has been the following well
known result from the linear theory of plasma waves: while
the fast, slow and entropy modes are damped at the meanfree-path scale both by collisional viscosity (Braginskii 1965)
and by collisionless wave-particle interactions (Barnes 1966),
the Alfvén waves are only damped at the ion gyroscale. It has,
therefore, been assumed that the MHD description, inasmuch
as it concerns the Alfvén-wave cascade, can be extended to
the ion gyroscale, with the understanding that this cascade is
decoupled from the damped cascades of the rest of the MHD
modes. This approach and its application to the turbulence in
the ISM are best explained by Lithwick & Goldreich (2001).
While the fluid description may be sufficient to understand
the Alfvénic fluctuations in the inertial range, it is certainly inadequate for everything else. The fundamental challenge that
a comprehensive theory of astrophysical plasma turbulence
must meet is to give the full account of how the turbulent fluctuation energy injected at the outer scale is cascaded to small
scales and deposited into particle heat. We shall see (§ 3.4
and § 3.5) that the familiar concept of an energy cascade can
be generalized in the kinetic framework as the kinetic cascade
of a single quantity that we call the generalized energy. The
small scales developed in the process are small scales both
in the position and velocity space. The fundamental reason
for this is the low collisionality of the plasma: since heating
cannot ultimately be accomplished without collisions, large
gradients in phase space are necessary for the collisions to be
effective.
In order to understand the physics of the kinetic cascade in
various scale ranges, we derive in what follows a hierarchy
of simplified, yet rigorous kinetic, fluid and hybrid descrip-

Solar
wind
at
1 AU(a)

Parameter

Warm
ionized
ISM(b)

Accretion Galaxy
flow near clusters
(d)
Sgr A∗(c) (cores)

ne = ni , cm−3
Te , K
Ti , K
B, G
βi

30
∼ Ti (e)
5 × 105
10−4
5

0.5
8000
8000
10−6
14

106
1011
∼ 1012 (f)
30
4

6 × 10−2
3 × 107
?(e)
7 × 10−6
9

vthi , km/s
vA , km/s
U, km/s(f)

90
40
∼ 10

10
3
∼ 10

105
7 × 104
∼ 104

700
60
∼ 102

L, km(f)
(mi /me )1/2 λmfpi , km
λmfpi , km(g)
ρi , km
ρe , km

∼ 105
1010
3 × 108
90
2

∼ 1015
2 × 108
6 × 106
1000
30

∼ 108
4 × 1010
109
0.4
0.003

∼ 1017
4 × 1016
1015
105
200

a

Values for slow wind (Vsw = 350 km/s) measured by Cluster spacecraft and taken from Bale et al. (2005), except the value of Te , which
they do not report, but which is expected to be of the same order as Ti
(Newbury et al. 1998). Note that the data interval studied by Bale et al.
(2005) is slightly atypical, with βi higher than usual in the solar wind
(the full range of βi variation in the solar wind is roughly between 0.1
and 10; see Howes et al. 2008a for another, perhaps more typical, fiducial set of slow-wind parameters and Appendix A of the review by
Bruno & Carbone 2005 for slow- and fast-wind parameters measured
by Helios 2). However, we use their parameter values as our representative example because the spectra they report show with particular
clarity both the electric and magnetic fluctuations in both the inertial
and dissipation ranges (see Fig. 1). See further discussion in § 8.1.
b Typical values (see, e.g., Norman & Ferrara 1996; Ferrière 2001). See
discussion in § 8.2.
c Values based on observational constraints for the radio-emitting
plasma around the Galactic Center (Sgr A∗ ) as interpreted by
Loeb & Waxman (2007) (see also Quataert 2003). See discussion in
§ 8.3.
d Values for the core region of the Hydra A cluster taken from
Ensslin & Vogt (2006); see Schekochihin & Cowley 2006 for a consistent set of numbers for the hot plasmas outside the cores. See discussion
in § 8.4.
e We assume T ∼ T for these estimates.
e
i
f Rough order-of-magnitude estimate.
g Defined λ
mfpi = vthi /νii , where νii is given by Eq. (51).

tions. While the full kinetic theory of turbulence is very difficult to handle either analytically or numerically, the models
we derive are much more tractable, yet rigorous. For all, the
regimes of applicability (scale/parameter ranges, underlying
assumptions) are clearly defined. In each of these regimes, the
kinetic cascade splits into several channels of energy trasfer,
some of them familiar (e.g., the Alfvénic cascade, § 5.3 and
§ 5.4), others conceptually new (e.g., the entropy cascade,
§§ 7.6-7.8).
In order to introduce this theoretical framework in a way
that is both analytically systematic and physically intelligible,
let us first consider the characteristic scales that are relevant to
the problem of astrophysical turbulence (§ 1.5). The models
we derive are previewed in § 1.6, at the end of which the plan
of further developments is given.
1.5. Scales in the Problem
1.5.1. Outer Scale

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

5

F IG . 2.- Partition of the wave-number space by characteristic scales. The wave numbers are normalized by l0 ∼ v3A /ε, where ε is the total power input (see
§ 1.2). Dotted line shows the path an Alfvén-wave cascade starting at the outer scale L ∼ l0 takes through the wave-number space. We also show the regions of
validity of the three tertiary approximations. They all require kk ≪ k⊥ (anisotropic fluctuations) and kk ρi ∼ kk vthi /Ωi ≪ 1 (low-frequency limit). Reduced
MHD (RMHD, § 2) is valid when k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi ≪ (me /mi )1/2 (strongly magnetized collisional limit, adiabatic electrons). The regions of validity of Kinetic
Reduced MHD (KRMHD, § 5) and Electron Reduced MHD (ERMHD, § 7) lie within that of the isothermal electron/gyrokinetic ion approximation (Fig. 4) with
the additional requirement that k⊥ ρi ≪ min(1, kk λmfpi ) (strongly magnetized ions) for KRMHD or k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 (unmagnetized ions) for ERMHD. The collisional
limit of KRMHD (§ 6.1 and Appendix D), (me /mi )1/2 ≪ kk λmfpi ≪ 1, is similar to RMHD, except electrons are isothermal. The dotted line is the scaling of kk
vs k⊥ from critical balance in both the Alfvén-wave [§ 1.2, Eq. (5)] and kinetic-Alfvén-wave [§ 7.4, Eq. (221)] regimes.

It is a generic feature of turbulent systems that energy is injected via some large-scale mechanism: "large scale" in this
context means some scale (or a range of scales) comparable
with the size of the system, depending on its global properties, and much larger than the microphysical scales at which
energy can be dissipated and converted into heat. Examples
of large-scale stirring of turbulent fluctuations include the solar activity in the corona (launching Alfvén waves to produce
turbulence in the solar wind); supernova explosions in the
ISM (e.g., Norman & Ferrara 1996; Ferrière 2001); the magnetorotational instability in accretion disks (Balbus & Hawley
1998); merger events, galaxy wakes and active galactic
nuclei in galaxy clusters (e.g., Subramanian et al. 2006;
Ensslin & Vogt 2006; Chandran 2005a). Since in this paper
we are concerned with the local properties of astrophysical
plasmas, let us simply assume that energy injection occurs at
some characteristic outer scale L. All further considerations
will apply to scales that are much smaller than L and we will
assume that the particular character of the energy injection
does not matter at these small scales.
In most astrophysical situations, one cannot assume that
equilibrium quantities such as density, temperature, mean velocity and mean magnetic field are uniform at the outer scale.
However, at scales much smaller than L, the gradients of the
small-scale fluctuating fields are much larger than the outerscale gradients (although the fluctuation amplitudes are much
smaller; for the mean magnetic field, this assumption is discussed in some detail in § 1.3), so we may neglect the equilibrium gradients and consider the turbulence to be homoge-

neous. Specifically, this is a good assumption deep in the inertial range where kk L ≫ 1 [Eq. (6)], i.e., not only the perpendicular scales but also the much larger parallel ones are
still shorter than the outer scale. Note that we cannot, technically speaking, assume that the outer-scale energy injection
is anisotropic, so the anisotropy is also the property of small
scales only.
1.5.2. Microscales

There are four scales at which dissipation occurs and
which, therefore, mark the transitions between distinct physical regimes:
Electron diffusion scale. - At kk λmfpi (mi /me )1/2 ≫ 1, the
electron response is isothermal (§ 4.4, Appendix A.4). At
kk λmfpi (mi /me )1/2 ≪ 1, it is adiabatic (§ 4.8.4, Appendix A.3).
Mean free path. - At kk λmfpi ≫ 1, the plasma is collisionless.
In this regime, wave-particle interactions can dissipate some
of the turbulent fluctuations via Barnes damping (§ 6.2). At
kk λmfpi ≪ 1, the plasma is collisional and fluid-like (§ 6.1,
Appendices A and D).
Ion gyroscale. - At k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, the ions are unmagnetized and
have a Boltzmann response (§ 7.1). At k⊥ ρi ∼ 1, they are
heated by wave-particle interactions (via a kinetic ion-entropy
cascade, see §§ 7.6-7.7). At k⊥ ρi ≪ 1, ions (as well as the
electrons) are magnetized and the magnetic field is frozen
into the ion flow (the E × B velocity field). Note that the ion

6

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

√
inertial scale di = ρi / βi is comparable to the ion gyroscale
unless the plasma beta βi = 8πni Ti /B2 is very different from
unity. In the theories advocated below, di does not play a special role except in the limit of Ti ≪ Te , which is not common
in astrophysical plasmas (see further discussion in § 8.1.4 and
Appendix E).
Electron gyroscale. - At k⊥ ρe ∼ 1, the electrons are heated
by wave-particle interactions (via a kinetic electron-entropy
cascade, see § 7.8). At k⊥ ρe ≪ 1, electrons are magnetized
and the magnetic field is frozen into the electron flow (§ 4,
§ 7, Appendix C).

Typical values of these scales and of several other key parameters are given in Table 1. In Fig. 2, we show how the
wave-number space, (k⊥ , kk ), is divided by these scales into
several domains, where the physics is different. Further partitioning of the wave-number space results from comparing
k⊥ ρi and kk λmfpi (k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi is the limit of strong magnetization, see Appendix A.2) and, most importantly, from
comparing parallel and perpendicular wave numbers. As we
explained above, observational and numerical evidence tells
us that Alfvénic turbulence is anisotropic, kk ≪ k⊥ . In Fig. 2,
we sketch the path the turbulent cascade is expected to take
in the wave-number space (we use the scalings of kk with k⊥
that follow from the GS argument for the Alfvén waves and an
analogous argument for the kinetic Alfvén waves, reviewed in
§ 1.2 and § 7.4, respectively).
1.6. Kinetic and Fluid Models
What is the correct analytical description of the turbulent
plasma along the (presumed) path of the cascade? As we
promised above, it is going to be possible to simplify the full
kinetic theory substantially. These simplifications can be obtained in the form of a hierarchy of approximations.
Gyrokinetics (§ 3). - The starting point for these develop-

ments and the primary approximation in the hierarchy is gyrokinetics, a low-frequency kinetic approximation achieved
by averaging over the cyclotron motion of the particles. Gyrokinetics is appropriate for the study of subsonic plasma
turbulence in virtually all astrophysically relevant parameter
ranges (Howes et al. 2006). For fluctuations at frequencies
lower than the ion cyclotron frequency, ω ≪ Ωi , gyrokinetics can be systematically derived by making use of the two
assumptions that underpin the GS theory: (a) anisotropy of
the turbulence, so ǫ ∼ kk /k⊥ is used as the small parameter, and (b) strong interactions, i.e., the fluctuation amplitudes
are assumed to be such that wave propagation and nonlinear
interaction occur on comparable time scales: from Eq. (3),
u⊥ /vA ∼ ǫ. The first of these assumptions implies that fluctuations at Alfvénic frequencies satisfy ω ∼ kk vA ≪ Ωi . This
makes gyrokinetics an ideal tool both for analytical theory and
for numerical studies of astrophysical plasma turbulence; the
numerical approaches are also made attractive by the long experience of gyrokinetic simulations accumulated in the fusion
research and by the existence of publicly available gyrokinetic codes (Kotschenreuther et al. 1995; Jenko et al. 2000;
Candy & Waltz 2003; Chen & Parker 2003). A concise review of gyrokinetics is provided in § 3 (see Howes et al. 2006
for a detailed derivation). The reader is urged to pay particular
attention to § 3.4 and § 3.5, where the concept of the kinetic
cascade of generalized energy is introduced and the particle
heating in gyrokinetics is discussed. The region of validity

of gyrokinetics is illustrated in Fig. 3: it covers virtually the
entire path of the turbulent cascade, except the largest (outer)
scales, where one cannot assume anisotropy. Note that the
two-fluid theory, which is the starting point for the MHD theory (see Appendix A), is not a good description at collisionless scales. It is important to mention, however, that the formulation of gyrokinetics that we adopt, while appropriate for
treating fluctuations at collisionless scales, does nevertheless
require a certain (weak) degree of collisionality (see discussion in § 3.1.3).
Isothermal Electron Fluid (§ 4). - While gyrokinetics constitutes a significant simplification, it is still a fully kinetic
description. Further progress towards simpler models is
achieved by showing that, for parallel scales below the electron diffusion scale, kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 , and perpendicular
scales above the electron gyroscale, k⊥ ρe ≪ 1, the electrons
are a magnetized isothermal fluid while ions must be treated
kinetically. This is the secondary approximation in our hierarchy, derived in § 4 via an asymptotic expansion in (me /mi )1/2
(see also Appendix C.1). The plasma is described by the
ion gyrokinetic equation and two fluid-like equations that
contain electron dynamics-these are summarized in § 4.9.
The region of validity of this approximation is illustrated in
Fig. 4: it does not capture the dissipative effects around the
electron diffusion scale or the electron heating, but it remains
uniformly valid as the cascade passes from collisional to
collisionless scales and also as it crosses the ion gyroscale.

In order to elucidate the nature of the turbulence above and
below the ion gyroscale, we derive two tertiary approximations, valid for k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 (§ 5) and for k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 (§ 7; see also
Appendix C, which gives a nonrigorous, nongyrokinetic, but
perhaps more intuitive, derivation of the results of § 4 and § 7).
Kinetic Reduced MHD (§ 5 and § 6). - On scales above the ion
gyroscale, known as the "inertial range" we demonstrate that
the decoupling of the Alfvén-wave cascade and its indifference to both collisional and collisionless damping are explicit
and analytically provable properties. We show rigorously
the Alfvén-wave cascade is governed by a closed set of two
fluid-like equations for the stream and flux functions-the Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (RMHD)-independently of
the collisionality (§ 5.3 and § 5.4; the derivation of RMHD
from MHD and its properties are discussed in § 2). The cascade proceeds via interaction of oppositely propagating wave
packets and is decoupled from the density and magnetic-fieldstrength fluctuations (in the collisional limit, these are the
entropy and slow modes; see § 6.1 and Appendix D). The
latter are passively mixed by the Alfvén waves, but, unlike
in the fluid (collisional) limit, this passive cascade is governed by a (simplified) kinetic equation for the ions (§ 5.5).
Together with RMHD, it forms a hybrid fluid-kinetic description of magnetized turbulence in a weakly collisional
plasma, which we call Kinetic Reduced MHD (KRMHD).
The KRMHD equations are summarized in § 5.7. While
the Alfvén waves are undamped in this approximation, the
density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations are subject
to damping both in the collisional (Braginskii 1965 viscous
damping, § 6.1 and Appendix D) and collisionless (Barnes
1966 damping, § 6.2) limits, provided they develop scales
along the magnetic field that are comparable to or smaller than
the mean free path. However, the ion kinetic equation is linear along the moving field lines associated with the Alfvén

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
waves, so, in the absence of finite-gyroradius effects, the density and field-strength fluctuations do not develop small parallel scales and their cascade may be undamped above the ion
gyroscale-this is discussed in § 6.3.
Electron Reduced MHD (§ 7). - At the ion gyroscale, the
Alfvénic and the passive cascades are no longer decoupled
and their energy is partially damped via collisionless waveparticle interactions. This part of the energy is channelled into
ion heat. The rest of it is converted into a cascade of kinetic
Alfvén waves (KAW, also sometimes referred to in astrophysical literature as whistlers; see, e.g., Quataert & Gruzinov
1999). This cascade extends through what is known as
the "dissipation range" to the electron gyroscale, where
its energy is also damped by wave-particle interaction and
transferred into electron heat. The KAW turbulence is
again anisotropic with kk ≪ k⊥ . It is governed by a pair of
fluid-like equations, also derived from gyrokinetics. We call
them Electron Reduced MHD (ERMHD). In certain special
limits (worked out in Appendix E), they coincide with the
reduced (anisotropic) form of what is known as the Electron,
or Hall, MHD (Kingsep et al. 1990). The ERMHD equations
are derived in § 7.1 (see also Appendix C.2) and the KAW
cascade is discussed in §§ 7.2-7.4. In § 7.6 and § 7.8, we
consider the entropy cascade below the ion gyroscale-a
process whereby the collisionless damping occurring at the
ion and electron gyroscales is made irreversible and particles
are heated. This part of the cascade is purely kinetic and its
salient feature is the particle distribution functions developing
small scales in phase space.

The regions of validity of the tertiary approximations-
KRMHD and ERMHD-are illustrated in Fig. 2. In this figure, we also show the region of validity of the RMHD system derived from the standard compressible MHD equations
by assuming anisotropy of the turbulence and strong interactions. This derivation is the fluid analog of the derivation
of gyrokinetics. We present it in § 2, before embarking on
the gyrokinetics-based path outlined above, in order to make
a connection with the conventional MHD treatment and to
demonstrate with particular simplicity how the assumption of
anisotropy leads to a reduced fluid system in which the decoupling of the cascades of the Alfvén waves, slow waves and the
entropy mode is manifest (Appendix A extends this derivation
to Braginskii 1965 two-fluid equations in the limit of strong
magnetization; it also works out rigorously the transition from
the fluid limit to the KRMHD equations).
The main formal developments of this paper are contained
in §§ 3-7. The outline given above is meant to help the reader
navigate these sections. A reader who would rather avoid
exposure to technicalities should gain a fairly good practical understanding of what is done there by reading § 2, § 3.1,
§§ 3.4-3.5, § 4.9, § 5.7, § 6.3, and § 7.10. In § 8, we discuss
at some length how our results apply to various astrophysical plasmas with weak collisionality: the solar wind, the ISM,
accretion disks, and galaxy clusters. Finally, in § 9, we provide a brief epilogue and make a few remarks about future
directions of inquiry. A number of technical appendices is
included-in particular, Appendix B treats in some detail the
collision terms in gyrokinetics, a subject that has so far received relatively little treatment in the literature.
2. REDUCED MHD AND THE DECOUPLING OF TURBULENT
CASCADES

7

Consider the equations of compressible MHD
dρ
= −ρ∇ * u,
(7)
dt


du
B * ∇B
B2
ρ
+
= −∇ p +
,
(8)
dt
8π
4π
5
p
ds
= 0, s = γ , γ = ,
(9)
dt
ρ
3
dB
= B * ∇u − B∇ * u,
(10)
dt
where ρ is the mass density, u velocity, p pressure, B magnetic
field, s the entropy density, and d/dt = ∂/∂t + u * ∇ (the conditions under which these equations are valid are discussed in
Appendix A). Consider a uniform static equilibrium with a
straight mean field in the z direction, so
ρ = ρ0 + δρ,

p = p0 + δ p,

B = B0 ẑ + δB,

(11)

where ρ0 , p0 , and B0 are constants. In what follows, the subscripts k and ⊥ will be used to denote the projections of fields,
variables and gradients on the mean-field direction ẑ and onto
the plane (x, y) perpendicular to this direction, respectively.
2.1. RMHD Ordering

As we explained in the Introduction, observational and numerical evidence makes it safe to assume that the turbulence
in such a system will be anisotropic with kk ≪ k⊥ (at scales
smaller than the outer scale, kk L ≫ 1; see § 1.3 and § 1.5.1).
Let us, therefore, introduce a small parameter ǫ ∼ kk /k⊥ and
carry out a systematic expansion of Eqs. (7-10) in ǫ. In this
expansion, the fluctuations are treated as small, but not arbitrarily so: in order to estimate their size, we shall adopt the
critical-balance conjecture (3), which is now treated not as a
detailed scaling prescription but as an ordering assumption.
This allows us to introduce the following ordering:
uk
δBk
kk
δ p δB⊥
δρ u⊥
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼ ǫ, (12)
ρ0
vA
vA
p0
B0
B0
k⊥
√
where vA = B0 / 4πρ0 is the Alfvén speed. Note that this
means that we order the Mach number
ǫ
u
(13)
M∼ ∼ √ ,
cs
βi
where cs = (γ p0 /ρ0 )1/2 is the speed of sound and
β=

8π p0 2 c2s
=
γ v2A
B20

(14)

is the plasma beta, which is ordered to be order unity in the ǫ
expansion (subsidiary limits of high and low β can be taken
after the ǫ expansion is done; see § 2.4).
In Eq. (12), we made two auxiliary ordering assumptions: that the velocity and magnetic-field fluctuations
have the character of Alfvén and slow waves (δB⊥ /B0 ∼
u⊥ /vA , δBk /B0 ∼ uk /vA ) and that the relative amplitudes
of the Alfvén-wave-polarized fluctuations (δB⊥ /B0 , u⊥ /vA ),
slow-wave-polarized fluctuations (δBk /B0 , uk /vA ) and density/pressure/entropy fluctuations (δρ/ρ0 , δ p/p0 ) are all the
same order. Strictly speaking, whether this is the case depends
on the energy sources that drive the turbulence: as we shall
see, if no slow waves (or entropy fluctuations) are launched,
none will be present. However, in astrophysical contexts, the

8

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

outer-scale energy input may be assumed random and, therefore, comparable power is injected into all types of fluctuations.
We further assume that the characteristic frequency of the
fluctuations is ω ∼ kk vA [Eq. (3)], meaning that the fast waves,
for which ω ≃ k⊥ (v2A + c2s )1/2 , are ordered out. This restriction must be justified empirically. Observations of the solar wind turbulence confirm that it is primarily Alfvénic (see,
e.g., Bale et al. 2005) and that its compressive component is
substantially pressure-balanced (Roberts 1990; Burlaga et al.
1990; Marsch & Tu 1993; Bavassano et al. 2004, see Eq. (22)
below). A weak-turbulence calculation of compressible MHD
turbulence in low-beta plasmas (Chandran 2005b) suggests
that only a small amount of energy is transferred from the fast
waves to Alfvén waves with large kk . A similar conclusion
emerges from numerical simulations (Cho & Lazarian 2002,
2003). As the fast waves are also expected to be subject to
strong collisionless damping and/or to strong dissipation after
they steepen into shocks, we eliminate them from our consideration of the problem and concentrate on low-frequency
turbulence.
2.2. Alfvén Waves

We start by observing that the Alfvén-wave-polarized
fluctuations are two-dimensionally solenoidal: since, from
Eq. (7),
∇*u = −

d δρ
= O(ǫ2 )
dt ρ0

(15)

and ∇ * δB = 0 exactly, separating the O(ǫ) part of these divergences gives ∇⊥ * u⊥ = 0 and ∇⊥ * δB⊥ = 0. To lowest order
in the ǫ expansion, we may, therefore, express u⊥ and δB⊥ in
terms of scalar stream (flux) functions:
u⊥ = ẑ × ∇⊥ Φ,

δB
√ ⊥ = ẑ × ∇⊥ Ψ.
4πρ0

(16)

Evolution equations for Φ and Ψ are obtained by substituting
the expressions (16) into the perpendicular parts of the induction equation (10) and the momentum equation (8)-of the
latter the curl is taken to annihilate the pressure term. Keeping only the terms of the lowest order, O(ǫ2 ), we get
∂Φ
∂Ψ
+ {Φ, Ψ} = vA
,
(17)
∂t
∂z


∂
∂ 2
∇ Φ + Φ, ∇2⊥ Φ = vA ∇2⊥ Ψ + Ψ, ∇2⊥ Ψ , (18)
∂t ⊥
∂z

where {Φ, Ψ} = ẑ * (∇⊥ Φ × ∇⊥ Ψ) and we have taken into
account that, to lowest order,
d ∂
∂
= + u⊥ * ∇⊥ =
+ {Φ, * * *} ,
dt ∂t
∂t
∂
1
∂ δB⊥
* ∇⊥ =
+
+ {Ψ, * * *} .
b̂ * ∇ =
∂z B0
∂z vA

(19)
(20)

Here b̂ = B/B0 is the unit vector along the perturbed field line.
Equations (17-18) are known as the Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (RMHD). The first derivations of these
equations (in the context of fusion plasmas) are due
to Kadomtsev & Pogutse (1974) and to Strauss (1976).
These were followed by many systematic derivations
and generalizations employing various versions and refinements of the basic expansion, taking into account

the non-Alfvénic modes (which we will do in § 2.4),
and including the effects of spatial gradients of equilibrium fields (e.g., Strauss 1977; Montgomery 1982;
Hazeltine 1983; Hazeltine et al. 1987; Zank & Matthaeus
1992; Kinney & McWilliams 1997; Bhattacharjee et al. 1998;
Kruger et al. 1998; Fitzpatrick & Porcelli 2004). A comparative review of these expansion schemes and their (often close)
relationship to ours is outside the scope of this paper. One
important point we wish to emphasize is that we do not assume the plasma beta [defined in Eq. (14)] to be either large
or small.
Equations (17) and (18) form a closed set, meaning that the
Alfvén-wave cascade decouples from the slow waves and density fluctuations. It is to the turbulence described by Eqs. (1718) that the GS theory outlined in § 1.2 applies.11 In § 5.3, we
will show that Eqs. (17) and (18) correctly describe inertialrange Alfvénic fluctuations even in a collisionless plasma,
where the full MHD description [Eqs. (7-10)] is not valid.
2.3. Elsasser Fields

The MHD equations (7-10) in the incompressible limit
(ρ = const) acquire a symmetric √
form if written in terms of
the Elsasser fields z± = u ± δB/ 4πρ (Elsasser 1950). Let
us demonstrate how this symmetry manifests itself in the reduced equations derived above.
We introduce Elsasser potentials ζ ± = Φ ± Ψ, so that z±
⊥=
ẑ × ∇⊥ ζ ± . For these potentials, Eqs. (17-18) become

∂
1  + 2 −  − 2 +
∂ 2 ±
ζ , ∇⊥ ζ + ζ , ∇⊥ ζ
∇⊥ ζ ∓ vA ∇2⊥ ζ ± = −
∂t
∂z
2

∓∇2⊥ {ζ + , ζ − } .
(21)

These equations show that the RMHD has a simple set of exact solutions: if ζ − = 0 or ζ + = 0, the nonlinear term vanishes
and the other, nonzero, Elsasser potential is simply a fluctuation of arbitrary shape and magnitude propagating along
the mean field at the Alfvén speed vA : ζ ± = f ± (x, y, z ∓ vAt).
These solutions are finite-amplitude Alfvén-wave packets of
arbitrary shape. Only counterpropagating such solutions can
interact and thereby give rise to the Alfvén-wave cascade
(Kraichnan 1965). Note that these interactions are conservative in the sense that the "+" and "−" waves scatter off each
other without exchanging energy.
Note that the individual conservation of the "+" and "−"
waves' energies means that the energy fluxes associated with
these waves need not be equal, so instead of a single Kolmogorov flux ε assumed in the scaling arguments reviewed
11 The Alfvén-wave turbulence in the RMHD system has been studied by many authors. Some of the relevant numerical investigations are
due to Kinney & McWilliams (1998), Dmitruk et al. (2003), Oughton et al.
(2004), Rappazzo et al. (2007, 2008), Perez & Boldyrev (2008). Analytical theory has mostly been confined to the weak-turbulence paradigm
(Ng & Bhattacharjee 1996, 1997; Bhattacharjee & Ng 2001; Galtier et al.
2002; Lithwick & Goldreich 2003; Galtier & Chandran 2006). We note that
adopting the critical balance [Eq. (3)] as an ordering assumption for the expansion in kk /k⊥ does not preclude one from subsequently attempting a
weak-turbulence approach: the latter should simply be treated as a subsidiary
expansion. Indeed, implementing the anisotropy assumption on the level of
MHD equations rather than simultaneously with the weak-turbulence closure
(Galtier et al. 2000) significantly reduces the amount of algebra. One should,
however, bear in mind that the weak-turbulence approximation always breaks
down at some sufficiently small scale-namely, when k⊥ ∼ (vA /U)2 kk2 L,
where L is the outer scale of the turbulence, U velocity at the outer scale, and
kk the parallel wave number of the Alfvén waves (see Goldreich & Sridhar
1997 or the review by Schekochihin & Cowley 2007). Below this scale, interactions cannot be assumed weak.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
in § 1.2, we could have ε+ 6= ε− . The GS theory can be
generalized to this case of imbalanced Alfvénic cascades
(Lithwick et al. 2007; Beresnyak & Lazarian 2007; Chandran
2008), but here we will focus on the balanced turbulence, ε+ ∼
ε− . If one considers the turbulence forced in a physical way
(i.e., without forcing the magnetic field, which would break
the flux conservation), the resulting cascade would always be
balanced. In the real world, imbalanced Alfvénic fluxes are
measured in the fast solar wind, where the influence of initial coditions in the solar atmosphere is more pronounced,
while the slow-wind turbulence is approximately balanced
(Marsch & Tu 1990a; see also reviews by Tu & Marsch 1995;
Bruno & Carbone 2005 and references therein).
2.4. Slow Waves and the Entropy Mode
In order to derive evolution equations for the remaining
MHD modes, let us first revisit the perpendicular part of the
momentum equation and use Eq. (12) to order terms in it. In
the lowest order, O(ǫ), we get the pressure balance


B0 δBk
δp
v2 δBk
=0 ⇒
= −γ A2
. (22)
∇⊥ δ p +
4π
p0
cs B 0

Using Eq. (22) and the entropy equation (9), we get


dδs
δρ
δs δ p
δρ v2A δBk
, (23)
=
−γ
= −γ
+
= 0,
dt
s0 p0
ρ0
ρ0 c2s B0

where s0 = p0 /ργ0 . Now, substituting Eq. (15) for ∇ * u in the
parallel component of the induction equation (10), we get


d δBk δρ
− b̂ * ∇uk = 0.
(24)
−
dt B0 ρ0
Combining Eqs. (23) and (24), we obtain
d δρ
1
b̂ * ∇uk ,
=−
dt ρ0
1 + c2s /v2A
d δBk
1
b̂ * ∇uk .
=
dt B0 1 + v2A/c2s

Eqs. (19-20) and is due solely to interactions with Alfvén
waves. Thus, both the slow-wave and the entropy-mode cascades occur via passive scattering/mixing by Alfvén waves, in
the course of which there is no energy exchange between the
cascades.
Note that in the high-beta limit, cs ≫ vA [see Eq. (14)], the
entropy mode is dominated by density fluctuations [Eq. (23),
cs ≫ vA ], which also decouple from the slow-wave cascade
[Eq. (25), cs ≫ vA ]. and are passively mixed by the Alfvénwave turbulence:
dδρ
= 0.
(28)
dt
The high-beta limit is equivalent to the incompressible approximation for the slow waves.
In § 5.5, we will derive a kinetic description for the inertialrange compressive fluctuations (density and magnetic-field
strength), which is more generally valid in weakly collisional
plasmas and which reduces to Eqs. (26-27) in the collisional
limit (see Appendix D). While these fluctuations will in general satisfy a kinetic equation, they will remain passive with
respect to the Alfvén waves.
2.5. Elsasser Fields for the Slow Waves

The original Elsasser (1950) symmetry was was derived for
incompressible MHD equations. However, for the "compressive" slow-wave fluctuations, we may introduce generalized
Elsasser fields:
1/2

δBk
v2A
√
.
(29)
1
+
z±
=
u
±
k
k
c2s
4πρ0
Straightforwardly, the evolution equation for these fields is
±

∂z±
k
(25)
(26)

Finally, we take the parallel component of the momentum
equation (8) and notice that, due to the pressure balance (22)
and to the smallness of the parallel gradients, the pressure
term is O(ǫ3 ), while the inertial and tension terms are O(ǫ2 ).
Therefore,
duk
δBk
.
= v2A b̂ * ∇
dt
B0

9

(27)

Equations (26-27) describe the slow-wave-polarized fluctuations, while Eq. (23) describes the zero-frequency entropy
mode, which is decoupled from the slow waves.12 The nonlinearity in Eqs. (26-27) enters via the derivatives defined in
12 For other expansion schemes leading to reduced sets of equations for
these "compressive" fluctuations see references in § 2.2. Note that the nature of the density fluctuations described above is distinct from the so called
"pseudosound" density fluctuations that arise in the "nearly incompressible" MHD theories (Montgomery et al. 1987; Matthaeus & Brown 1988;
Matthaeus et al. 1991; Zank & Matthaeus 1993). The "pseudosound" is essentially the density response caused by the nonlinear pressure fluctuations
calculated from the incompressibility constraint. The resulting density fluctuations are second order in Mach number and, therefore, order ǫ2 in our
expansion [see Eq. (13)]. The passive density fluctuations derived in this section are order ǫ and, therefore, supercede the "pseudosound" (see review by
Tu & Marsch 1995 for a discussion of the relevant solar-wind evidence).

∂zk
vA
∓p
=
2
∂t
1 + vA/c2s ∂z
1
−
2

1
−
2

1

1∓ p
1 + v2A /c2s
1

1± p
1 + v2A /c2s

!
!



ζ + , z±
k



ζ − , z±
k .

(30)

In the high-beta limit (vA ≪ cs ), the generalized Elsasser
fields (29) become the parallel components of the conventional incompressible Elsasser fields. We see that only in this
limit do the slow waves interact exclusively with the counterpropagating Alfvén waves, and so only in this limit does setting ζ − = 0 or ζ + = 0 gives rise to finite-amplitude slow-wave±
packet solutions z±
k = f (x, y, z ∓ vA t) analogous to the finiteamplitude Alfvén-wave packets discussed in § 2.3.13 For general β, the phase speed of the slow waves is smaller than that
of the Alfvén waves and, therefore, Alfvén waves can "catch
up" and interact with the slow waves that travel in the same
direction. All of these interactions are of scattering type and
involve no exchange of energy.
2.6. Scalings for Passive Fluctuations
13 Obviously, setting both ζ ± = 0 does always enable these finiteamplitude slow-wave solutions. More nontrivially, such finite-amplitude solutions exist in the Lagragian frame associated with the Alfvén waves-this
is discussed in detail in § 6.3.

10

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

The scaling of the passively mixed scalar fields introduced
above is slaved to the scaling of the Alfvénic fluctuations.
Consider for example the entrophy mode [Eq. (23)]. As
in Kolmogorov–Obukhov theory (see § 1.1), one assumes a
local-in-scale-space cascade of scalar variance and a constant
flux εs of this variance. Then, analogously to Eq. (1),
v2thi δs2λ
∼ εs .
s20 τλ

(31)

Since the cascade time is τλ−1 ∼ u⊥ * ∇⊥ ∼ vA /lkλ ∼ ε/u2⊥λ ,
δsλ  εs 1/2 u⊥λ
∼
,
s0
ε
vthi

(32)

so the scalar fluctuations have the same scaling as the turbulence that mixes them (Obukhov 1949; Corrsin 1951). In GS
turbulence, the scalar-variance spectrum should, therefore, be
−5/3
k⊥ (Lithwick & Goldreich 2001). The same argument applies to all passive fields.
It is the (presumably) passive electron-density spectrum
that provides the main evidence of the k−5/3 scaling in the interstellar turbulence (Armstrong et al. 1981, 1995; Lazio et al.
2004, see further discussion in § 8.2.1). The explanation of
this spectrum in terms of passive mixing of the entropy mode,
originally proposed by Higdon (1984), was developed on the
basis of the GS theory by Lithwick & Goldreich (2001). The
turbulent cascade of the compressive fluctuations and the relevant solar-wind data is discussed further in § 6.3. In particular, it will emerge that the anisotropy of these fluctuations
remains a nontrivial issue: is there an analog of the scaling
relation (5)? The scaling argument outlined above does not
invoke any assumptions about the relationship between the
parallel and perpendicular scales of the compressive fluctuations (other than the assumption that they are anisotropic).
Lithwick & Goldreich (2001) argue that the parallel scales of
the Alfvénic fluctuations will imprint themselves on the passively advected compressive ones, so Eq. (5) holds for the
latter as well. In § 6.3, we examine this conclusion in view
of the solar wind evidence and of the fact that the equations
for the compressive modes become linear in the Lagrangian
frame associated with the Alfvénic turbulence.
2.7. Five RMHD Cascades
Thus, the anisotropy and critical balance (3) taken as
ordering assumptions lead to a neat decomposition of the
MHD turbulent cascade into a decoupled Alfvén-wave cascade and cascades of slow waves and entropy fluctuations passively scattered/mixed by the Alfvén waves. More precisely,
Eqs. (23), (21) and (30) imply that, for arbitrary β, there are
five conserved quantities:14
Z
± 1
d 3 r ρ0 |∇ζ ± |2
(Alfven waves),
(33)
W⊥ =
2
Z
1
2
Wk± =
d 3 r ρ0 |z±
(slow waves),
(34)
k|
2
Z
δs2
1
d3r 2
(entropy fluctuations). (35)
Ws =
2
s0
14 Note that magnetic helicity of the perturbed field is not an invariant of
RMHD, except in two dimensions (see
R Appendix F.4). In 2D, there is also
conservation of the mean square flux, d 3 r |Ψ|2 (see Appendix F.2).

W⊥+ and W⊥− are always cascaded by interaction with each
other, Ws is passively mixed by W⊥+ and W⊥− , Wk± are passively
scattered by W⊥∓ and, unless β ≫ 1, also by W⊥± .
This is an example of splitting of the overall energy cascade
into several channells (recovered as a particular case of the
generalized kinetic cascade in Appendix D.2)-a concept that
will repeatedly arise in the kinetic treatment to follow.
The decoupling of the slow- and Alfvén-wave cascades in
MHD turbulence was studied in some detail and confirmed
in direct numerical simulations by Maron & Goldreich (2001,
for β ≫ 1) and by Cho & Lazarian (2002, 2003, for a range
of values of β). The derivation given in § 2.2 and § 2.4 (cf.
Lithwick & Goldreich 2001) provides a straightforward theoretical basis for these results, assuming anisotropy of the turbulence (which was also confirmed in these numerical studies).
It turns out that the decoupling of the Alfvén-wave cascade
that we demonstrated above for the anisotropic MHD turbulence is a uniformly valid property of plasma turbulence at
both collisional and collisionless scales and that this cascade
is correctly described by the RMHD equations (17-18) all the
way down to the ion gyroscale, while the fluctuations of density and magnetic-field strength do not satisfy simple fluid
evolution equations anymore and require solving the kinetic
equation. In order to prove this, we adopt a kinetic description and apply to it the same ordering (§ 2.1) as we used to
reduce the MHD equations. The kinetic theory that emerges
as a result is called gyrokinetics.
3. GYROKINETICS

The gyrokinetic formalism was first worked out
for linear waves by Rutherford & Frieman (1968)
and by Taylor & Hastie (1968) (see also Catto 1978;
Antonsen & Lane 1980; Catto et al. 1981) and subsequently
extended to the nonlinear regime by Frieman & Chen (1982).
Rigorous derivations of the gyrokinetic equation based on
the Hamiltonian formalism were developed by Dubin et al.
(1983, electrostatic) and Hahm et al. (1988, electromagnetic).
This approach is reviewed in Brizard & Hahm (2007). A
more pedestrian, but perhaps also more transparent exposition
of the gyrokinetics in a straight mean field can be found in
Howes et al. (2006), who also provide a detailed explanation
of the gyrokinetic ordering in the context of astrophysical
plasma turbulence and a treatment of the linear waves and
damping rates. Here we review only the main points so as
to allow the reader to understand the present paper without
referring elsewhere.
In general, a plasma is completely described by the distribution function fs (t, r, v)-the probability density for a particle
of species s (= i, e) to be found at the spatial position r moving with velocity v. This function obeys the kinetic Vlasov–
Landau (or Boltzmann) equation




∂ fs
v×B
qs
∂ fs
∂ fs
*
E+
, (36)
+ v * ∇ fs +
=
∂t
ms
c
∂v
∂t c
where qs and ms are the particle's charge and mass, c is the
speed of light, and the right-hand side is the collision term
(quadratic in f ). The electric and magnetic fields are
1 ∂A
, B = ∇ × A.
(37)
c ∂t
The first equality is Faraday's law uncurled, the second
the magnetic-field solenoidality condition; we shall use the
E = −∇φ −

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
Coulomb gauge, ∇ * A = 0. The fields satisfy the Poisson and
the Ampère–Maxwell equations with the charge and current
densities determined by fs (t, r, v):
X
X Z
∇ * E = 4π
qs ns = 4π
qs d 3 v f s ,
(38)
s

∇×B−

s

4π X
1 ∂E 4π
=
j=
qs
c ∂t
c
c s

Z

d 3 v v fs .

(39)

3.1. Gyrokinetic Ordering and Dimensionless Parameters

As in § 2 we set up a static equilibrium with a uniform mean
field, B0 = B0 ẑ, E0 = 0, assume that the perturbations will be
anisotropic with kk ≪ k⊥ (at scales smaller than the outer
scale, kk L ≫ 1; see § 1.3 and § 1.5.1), and construct an expansion of the kinetic theory around this equilibrium with respect
to the small parameter ǫ ∼ kk /k⊥ . We adopt the ordering expressed by Eqs. (3) and (12), i.e., we assume the perturbations
to be strongly interacting Alfvén waves plus electron density
and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations.
Besides ǫ, several other dimensionless parameters are
present, all of which are formally considered to be of order
unity in the gyrokinetic expansion: the electron-ion mass ratio me /mi , the charge ratio
Z = qi /|qe | = qi /e

(40)

(for hydrogen, this is 1, which applies to most astrophysical
plasmas of interest to us), the temperature ratio15
τ = Ti /Te ,

(41)

and the plasma (ion) beta

−1
8πni Ti
Z
v2
=
=
β
1
+
,
βi = thi
τ
v2A
B20

(42)

where vthi = (2Ti /mi )1/2 is the ion thermal speed and the total β
was defined in Eq. (14) based on the total pressure p = ni Ti +
ne Te . We shall occasionally also use the electron beta βe =
8πne Te /B20 = βi Z/τ . The total beta is β = βi + βe .
3.1.1. Wave Numbers and Frequencies

As we want our theory to be uniformly valid at all (perpendicular) scales above, at or below the ion gyroscale, we order
k⊥ ρi ∼ 1,

(43)

where ρi = vthi /Ωi is the ion gyroradius, Ωi = qi B0 /cmi the ion
cyclotron frequency. Note that
r
me
Z
ρe = √
ρi .
(44)
τ mi
15

It can be shown that equilibrium temperatures change on the time
scale ∼ (ǫ2 ω)−1 (Howes et al. 2006). On the other hand, from standard
theory of collisional transport (e.g., Helander & Sigmar 2002), the ion and
electron temperatures equalize on the time scale ∼ νie−1 ∼ (mi /me )1/2 νii−1
[see Eq. (50)]. Therefore, τ can depart from unity by an amount of order
ǫ2 (ω/νii )(mi /me )1/2 . In our ordering scheme [Eq. (48)], this is O(ǫ2 ) and,
therefore, we should simply set τ = 1 + O(ǫ2 ). However, we shall carry the
parameter τ because other ordering schemes are possible that permit arbitrary
values of τ . These are appropriate to plasmas with very weak collisions. For
example, in the solar wind, τ appears to be order unity but not exactly 1
(Newbury et al. 1998), while in accretion flows near the black hole, some
models predict τ ≫ 1 (see § 8.3).

11

Assuming Alfvénic frequencies implies
kk vA
k ⊥ ρi
ω
∼
∼ √ ǫ.
Ωi
Ωi
βi

(45)

Thus, gyrokinetics is a low-frequency limit that averages over
the time scales associated with the particle gyration. Because
we have assumed that the fluctuations are anisotropic and have
(by order of magnitude) Alfvénic frequencies, we see from
Eq. (45) that their frequency remains far below Ωi at all scales,
including the ion and even electron gyroscale-the gyrokinetics remains valid at all of these scales and the cyclotronfrequency effects are negligible (cf. Quataert & Gruzinov
1999).
3.1.2. Fluctuations

Equation (3) allows us to order the fluctuations of the scalar
potential: on the one hand, we have from Eq. (3) u⊥ ∼ ǫvA ; on
the other hand, the plasma mass flow velocity is (to the lowest
order) the E × B drift velocity of the ions, u⊥ ∼ cE⊥ /B0 ∼
ck⊥ φ/B0 , so
1
eφ τ
√ ǫ.
∼
Te
Z k ⊥ ρ i βi

(46)

All other fluctuations (magnetic, density, parallel velocity) are
ordered according to Eq. (12).
Note that the ordering of the flow velocity dictated by
Eq. (3) means that we are considering the limit of small Mach
numbers:
ǫ
u
(47)
∼√ .
M∼
vthi
βi
This means that the gyrokinetic description in the form used
below does not extend to large sonic flows that can be
present in many astrophysical systems. It is, in principle,
possible to extend the gyrokinetics to systems with sonic
flows (e.g., in the toroidal geometry; see Artun & Tang 1994;
Sugama & Horton 1997). However, we do not follow this
route because such flows belong to the same class of nonuniversal outer-scale features as background density and temperature gradients, system-specific geometry etc.-these can all
be ignored at small scales, where the turbulence should be approximately homogeneous and subsonic (as long as kk L ≫ 1,
see discussion in § 1.5.1).
3.1.3. Collisions

Finally, we want our theory to be valid both in the collisional and the collisionless regimes, so we do not assume
ω to be either smaller or larger than the (ion) collision frequency νii :
kk λmfpi
ω
∼ 1,
∼ √
νii
βi

(48)

where λmfpi = vthi /νii is the ion mean free path (this ordering can actually be inferred from equating the gyrokinetic entropy production terms to the collisional entropy production;
see extended discussion in Howes et al. 2006). Other collision rates are related to νii via a set of standard formulae (see,
e.g., Helander & Sigmar 2002), which will be useful in what
follows:
r
τ 3/2 mi
νii ,
(49)
νei = Zνee = 2
Z
me

12

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

F IG . 3.- The regions of validity in the wave-number space of two primary approximations-the two-fluid (Appendix A.1) and gyrokinetic (§ 3). The
gyrokinetic theory holds when kk ≪ k⊥ and ω ≪ Ωi [when kk ≪ k⊥ < ρ−1
i , the second requirement is automatically satisfied for Alfvén, slow and entropy
modes; see Eq. (45)]. The two-fluid equations hold when kk λmfpi ≪ 1 (collisional limit) and k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 (magnetized plasma). Note that the gyrokinetic theory
holds for all but the very largest (outer) scales, where anisotropy cannot be assumed.

r
8 τ 3/2 me
νii ,
νie = √
mi
3 π Z
√
2πZ 4 e4 ni ln Λ
νii =
,
1/2 3/2
mi Ti

(50)
(51)

where ln Λ is the Coulomb logarithm and the numerical factor in the definition of νie has been inserted for future notational convenience (see Appendix A). We always define
λmfpi = vthi /νii and λmfpe = vthe /νei = (Z/τ )2 λmfpi .
The ordering of the collision frequency expressed by
Eq. (48) means that collisions, while not dominant as in
the fluid description (Appendix A), are still retained in
the version of the gyrokinetic theory adopted by us. Their
presence is required in order for us to be able to assume
that the equilibrium distribution is Maxwellian [Eq. (52)
below] and for the heating and entropy production to be
treated correctly (§ 3.4 and § 3.5). However, our ordering of
collisions and of the fluctuation amplitudes (§ 3.1.2) imposes
certain limitations: thus, we cannot treat the class of nonlinear
phenomena involving particle trapping by parallel-varying
fluctuations, non-Maxwellian tails of particle distributions,
plasma instabilities arising from the equilibrium pressure
anisotropies (mirror, firehose) and their possible nonlinear
evolution to large amplitudes (see discussion in § 8.1.6).
The region of validity of the gyrokinetic approximation in
the wave-number space is illustrated in Fig. 3-it embraces
all of the scales that are expected to be tranversed by the
anisotropic energy cascade (except the scales close to the
outer scale).
As we explained above, me /mi , βi , k⊥ ρi and kk λmfpi (or

ω/νii ) are assigned order unity in the gyrokinetic expansion.
Subsidiary expansions in small me /mi (§ 4) and in small or
large values of the other three parameters (§§ 5-7) can be carried out at a later stage as long as their values are not so large
or small as to interfere with the primary expansion in ǫ. These
expansions will yield simpler models of turbulence with more
restricted domains of validity than gyrokinetics.
3.2. Gyrokinetic Equation

Given the gyrokinetic ordering introduced above, the expansion of the distribution function up to first order in ǫ can
be written as
qs φ(t, r)
fs (t, r, v) = F0s (v) −
F0s (v) + hs(t, Rs , v⊥ , vk ). (52)
T0s
To zeroth order, it is a Maxwellian:16
 2 
v
n0s
exp
− 2 ,
F0s (v) =
(πv2ths )3/2
vths

vths =

r

2T0s
,
ms

(53)

with uniform density n0s and temperature T0s and no mean
flow. As will be explained in more detail in § 3.5, F0s has a
slow time dependence via the equilibrium temperature, T0s =
T0s (ǫ2t). This reflects the slow heating of the plasma as the turbulent energy is dissipated. However, T0s can be treated as a
constant with respect to the time dependence of the first-order
distribution function (the time scale of the turbulent fluctuations). The first-order part of the distribution function is composed of the Boltzmann response [second term in Eq. (52), ordered in Eq. (46)] and the gyrocenter distribution function hs .
16 The use of isotropic equilibrium is a significant idelization-this is discussed in more detail in § 8.1.6.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
The spatial dependence of the latter is expressed not by the
particle position r but by the position Rs of the particle gyrocenter (or guiding center)-the center of the ring orbit that
the particle follows in a strong guide field:
v⊥ × ẑ
.
(54)
Ωs
Thus, some of the velocity dependence of the distribution
function is subsumed in the Rs dependence of hs . Explicitly,
hs depends only on two velocity-space variables: it is customary in the gyrokinetic literature for these to be chosen as
the particle energy εs = ms v2 /2 and its first adiabatic invariant μs = ms v2⊥ /2B0 (both conserved quantities to two lowest
orders in the gyrokinetic expansion). However, in a straight
uniform guide field B0 ẑ, the pair (v⊥ , vk ) is a simpler choice,
which will mostly be used in what follows (we shall sometimes find an alternative pair, v and ξ = vk /v, useful, especially
where collisions are concerned). It must be constantly kept in
mind that derivatives of hs with respect to the velocity-space
variables are taken at constant Rs , not at constant r.
The function hs satisfies the gyrokinetic equation:


qs F0s ∂hχiRs
∂hs c
∂hs
∂hs
,
+ vk
+ {hχiRs , hs } =
+
∂t
∂z B0
T0s
∂t
∂t c
(55)
where
v k A k v ⊥ * A⊥
−
,
(56)
χ(t, r, v) = φ −
c
c
the Poisson brackets are defined in the usual way:


∂hχiRs
∂hs
{hχiRs , hs } = ẑ *
,
(57)
×
∂Rs
∂Rs
Rs = r +

and the ring average notation is introduced:


Z 2π
v⊥ × ẑ
1
, v , (58)
dθ χ t, Rs −
hχ(t, r, v)iRs =
2π 0
Ωs

where θ is the angle in the velocity space taken in the plane
perpendicular to the guide field B0 ẑ. Note that, while χ is
a function of r, its ring average is a function of Rs . Note
also that the ring averages depend on the species index, as
does the gyrocenter variable Rs . Equation (55) is derived by
transforming the first-order kinetic equation to the gyrocenter
variable (54) and ring averaging the result (see Howes et al.
2006, or the references given at the beginning of § 3). The
ring-averaged collision integral (∂hs /∂t)c is discussed in Appendix B.
3.3. Field Equations
To Eq. (55), we must append the equations that determine
the electromagnetic field, namely, the potentials φ(t, r) and
A(t, r) that enter the expression for χ [Eq. (56)]. In the nonrelativistic limit (vthi ≪ c), these are the plasma quasineutrality constraint [which follows from the Poisson equation (38)
to lowest order in vthi /c]:

Z
X
X  qs φ
(59)
n0s + d 3 vhhs ir
0=
qs δns =
qs −
T0s
s
s

and the parallel and perpendicular parts of Ampère's law
[Eq. (39) to lowest order in ǫ and in vthi /c]:
Z
4π
4π X
2
∇⊥ Ak = −
jk = −
qs d 3 v vk hhs ir ,
(60)
c
c s

13


4π
ẑ * ∇⊥ × j⊥
c
#
"
X Z
4π
3
qs d vhv⊥ hs ir , (61)
= − ẑ * ∇⊥ ×
c
s

∇2⊥ δBk = −

where we have used δBk = ẑ * (∇⊥ × A⊥ ) and dropped the displacement current. Since field variables φ, Ak and δBk are
functions of the spatial variable r, not of the gyrocenter variable Rs , we had to determine the contribution from the gyrocenter distribution function hs to the charge distribution at
fixed r by performing a gyroaveraging operation dual to the
ring average defined in Eq. (58):


Z 2π
1
v⊥ × ẑ
hhs (t, Rs , v⊥ , vk )ir =
, v⊥ , vk .
dθ hs t, r +
2π 0
Ωs
(62)
In other words, the velocity-space integrals in Eqs. (59-61)
are performed over hs at constant r, rather than constant Rs .
If we Fourier-transform hs in Rs , the gyroveraging operation
takes a simple mathematical form:
X
heik*Rs ir hsk (t, v⊥ , vk )
hhs ir =
k

=

X
k

=

X




v⊥ × ẑ
eik*r exp ik *
hsk (t, v⊥ , vk )
Ωs
r

eik*r J0 (as )hsk (t, v⊥ , vk ),

(63)

k

where as = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωs and J0 is a Bessel function that arose
from the angle integral in the velocity space. In Eq. (61), an
analogous calculation taking into account the angular dependence of v⊥ leads to
Z
J1 (as )
4π X ik*r X
e
d 3 v ms v2⊥
hsk (t, v⊥ , vk ).
δBk = −
B0
as
s
k
(64)
Note that Eq. (61) [and, therefore, Eq. (64)] is the gyrokinetic equivalent of the perpendicular pressure balance that appeared in § 2 [Eq. (22)]:
X q s B0 Z
B0 δBk
∇2⊥
= ∇⊥ *
d 3 vhẑ × v⊥ hs ir
4π
c
s


Z
X
v⊥ × ẑ
3 ∂v⊥
, v⊥ , vk
hs t, r +
= ∇⊥ *
Ωs ms d v
∂θ
Ωs
s
XZ
= −∇⊥ ∇⊥ :
d 3 v ms hv⊥ v⊥ hs ir = −∇⊥ ∇⊥ : δP⊥ ,(65)
s

where we have integrated by parts with respect to the gyroangle θ and used ∂v⊥ /∂θ = ẑ × v⊥ , ∂ 2 v⊥ /∂θ2 = −v⊥ .
Once the fields are determined, they have to be substituted into χ [Eq. (56)] and the result ring averaged [Eq. (58)].
Again, we emphasize that φ, Ak and δBk are functions of r,
while hχiRs is a function of Rs . The transformation is accomplished via a calculation analogous to the one that led to
Eqs. (63) and (64):
X
(66)
eik*Rs hχiRs ,k ,
hχiRs =
k



vk Akk
T0s 2v2⊥ J1 (as ) δBkk
hχiRs ,k = J0 (as ) φk −
. (67)
+
c
qs v2ths as B0

14

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

The last equation establishes a correspondence between the
Fourier transforms of the fields with respect to r and the
Fourier transform of hχiRs with respect to Rs .
3.4. Generalized Energy
As promised in § 1.4, the central unifying concept of this
paper is now introduced.
If we multiply the gyrokinetic equation (55) by T0s hs /F0s
and integrate over the velocities and gyrocenters, we find that
the nonlinear term conserves the variance of hs and
Z
Z
Z
Z
∂hχiRs
T0s h2s
d
= d 3 v d 3 Rs q s
hs
d 3 v d 3 Rs
dt
2F0s
∂t


Z
Z
T0s hs ∂hs
. (68)
+ d 3 v d 3 Rs
F0s
∂t c

Let us now sum this equation over all species. The first term
on the right-hand side is
Z
X Z
∂hχiRs
hs
q s d 3 v d 3 Rs
∂t
s


Z
X Z
∂χ
= d3r
qs d 3 v
hs
∂t
r
s
#
"
Z
Z
X
X Z
∂A
1
∂φ
*
qs d 3 vhhs ir −
qs d 3 vhv hs ir
= d3r
∂t s
c ∂t
s
Z
X q2 φ2 n0s Z
d
s
+ d 3 r E * j,
(69)
d3r
=
dt
2T0s
s
where we have used Eq. (59) and Ampère's law [Eqs. (6061)] to express the integrals of hs . The second term on the
right-hand side is the total work done on plasma per unit time.
Using Faraday's law [Eq. (37)] and Ampère's law [Eq. (39)],
it can be written as
Z
Z
d
|δB|2
d3r E * j = −
+ Pext ,
(70)
d3r
dt
8π
R
where Pext ≡ d 3 r E * jext is the total power injected into the
system by the external energy sources (outer-scale stirring; in
terms of the Kolmogorov energy flux ε used in the scaling
arguments in § 1.2, Pext = V mi n0i ε, where V is the system volume). Combining Eqs. (68-70), we find (Howes et al. 2006)
#
"

Z
2
X Z
|δB|2
q2s φ2 n0s
d
dW
3
3 T0s hhs ir
+
−
≡
d r
d v
dt
dt
2F0s
2T0s
8π
s


Z
Z
X
T0s hs ∂hs
= Pext +
d 3 v d 3 Rs
.
(71)
F0s
∂t c
s
We will refer to W as the generalized energy.17 It is a positive
definite quantity-this becomes explicit if we use Eq. (59) to
express it in terms of the total perturbed distribution function
17 We use this term to emphasize the role of W as the cascaded quantity in
gyrokinetic turbulence (see below). This quantity is, in fact, the gyrokinetic
version of a collisionless kinetic invariant variously referred to as the generalized grand canonical potential (see Hallatschek 2004, who points out the
fundamental role of this quantity in plasma turbulence simulations) or free
energy (e.g., Scott 2007). The nonmagnetic part of W is related to the perturbed entropy of the system (Krommes & Hu 1994; Sugama et al. 1996, see
discussion in § 3.5).

δ fs = −qs φF0s /T0s + hs [see Eq. (52)]:
W=

Z

3

d r

XZ
s

T0s δ fs2 |δB|2
+
d v
2F0s
8π
3

!

.

(72)

Equation (71) is a conservation law of the generalized energy: Pext is the source and the second term on the right-hand
side, which is negative definite, represents collisional disssipation. This suggests that we might think of kinetic plasma
turbulence in terms of the generalized energy W injected by
the outer-scale stirring and dissipated by collisions. In order for the dissipation to be important, the collisional term in
Eq. (71) has to become comparable to Pext . This can happen
in two ways:
1. At collisional scales (kk λmfpi ∼ 1) due to deviations of
the perturbed distribution function from a local perturbed Maxwellian (see § 6.1 and Appendix D);
2. At collisionless scales (kk λmfpi ≫ 1) due the development of small scales in the velocity space (which is accompanied by the development of small perpendicular
scales in the position space; see § 7.6).
Thus, the dissipation is only important at particular (small)
scales, which are generally well separated from the outer
scale. The generalized energy is transferred from the outer
scale to the dissipation scales via a nonlinear cascade. We
shall refer to this cascade as the kinetic cascade. It is analogous to the energy cascade in fluid or MHD turbulence, but a
conceptually new feature is present: the small scales at which
dissipation happens are small scales both in the velocity and
position space. Note that, as far as small scales in the velocity space are concerned, the kinetic cascade is an essentially nonlinear phase mixing process, leading to the emergence of large gradients with respect to v⊥ , in contrast with
the linear parallel phase mixing, which produces large gradients in vk and whose role in the kinetic dissipation processes
has been appreciated for some time (Hammett et al. 1991;
Krommes & Hu 1994; Krommes 1999; Watanabe & Sugama
2004). The nonlinear perpendicular phase mixing turns out to
be a faster and, therefore, presumably dominant way of generating small-scale structure in the velocity space. It was anticipated in the development of gyrofluid moment hierarchies
by Dorland & Hammett (1993). Here wee treat it for the first
time as a phase-space turbulent cascade: this is done in § 7.6.
In the sections that follow, we shall derive particular forms
of W for various limiting cases of the gyrokinetic theory
(§ 4.7, § 5.6, § 7.5, Appendix D.2). We shall see that the kinetic cascade of W is, indeed, a direct generalization of the
more familiar fluid cascades (such as the RMHD cascades
discussed in § 2) and that W contains the energy invariants
of the fluid models in the appropriate limits. In these limits,
the cascade of the generalized energy will split into several
decoupled cascades, as it did in the case of RMHD (§ 2.7).
Whenever one of the physically important scales (§ 1.5.2) is
crossed and a change of physical regime occurs, these cascades are mixed back together into the overall kinetic cascade of W , which can then be split in a different way as it
emerges on the "opposite side" of the transition region in the
scale space. The conversion of the Alfvénic cascade into the
KAW cascade and the entropy cascade at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 is the most
interesting example of such a transition, discussed in § 7.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
The generalized energy appears to be the only quadratic
invariant of gyrokinetics in three dimensions; in two dimensions, many other invariants appear (see Appendix F).
3.5. Heating and Entropy
In a stationary state, all of the the turbulent power injected
by the external stirring is dissipated and thus transferred into
heat. Mathematically, this is expressed as a slow increase in
the temperature of the Maxwellian equilibrium. In gyrokinetics, the heating time scale is ordered as ∼ (ǫ2 ω)−1 .
Even though the dissipation of turbulent fluctuations may
be occurring "collisionlessly" at scales such that kk λmfpi ≫ 1
(e.g., via wave-particle interaction at the ion gyroscale), the
resulting heating must ultimately be effected with the help of
collisions. This is because heating is an irreversible process
and it is a small amount of collisions that make "collisionless" damping irreversible. In other words, slow heating of the
Maxwellian equilibrium is equivalent to entropy production
and Boltzmann's H-theorem rigorously requires collisions to
make this possible. Indeed, the total entropy of species s is
Z
Z
Ss = − d 3 r d 3 v fs ln fs


Z
Z
δ fs2
3
3
+ O(ǫ3), (73)
= − d r d v F0s ln F0s +
2F0s
R
where we took d 3 r δ fs = 0. It is then not hard to show that


Z
Z
1 dT0s dSs
3
T0s hs ∂hs
3
3
,
V n0s
=
= − d v d Rs
2
T0s dt
dt
F0s
∂t c
(74)
where the overlines mean avearging over times longer than
the characteristic time of the turbulent fluctuations ∼ ω −1
but shorter than the typical heating time ∼ (ǫ2 ω)−1 (see
Howes et al. 2006 for a detailed derivation of this and related results on heating in gyrokinetics; earlier discussions
of the entropy production in gyrokinetics can be found in
Krommes & Hu 1994; Krommes 1999; Sugama et al. 1996).
We have omitted the term describing the interspecies collisional temperature equalization. Note that both sides of
Eq. (74) are order ǫ2 ω.
If we now time average Eq. (71) in a similar fashion, the
left-hand side vanishes because it is a time derivative of a
quantity fluctuating on the time scale ∼ ω −1 and we confirm
that the right-hand side of Eq. (74) is simply equal to the average power Pext injected by external stirring. The import of
Eq. (74) is that it tells us that heating can only be effected
by collisions, while Eq. (71) implies that the injected power
gets to the collisional scales in velocity and position space by
means of a kinetic cascade of generalized energy. This cascade contains the cascade of entropy: indeed, the first term
inP
the expression for the generalized energy (72) is simply
− s T0s δSs , where δSs is the perturbed entropy [see Eq. (73)].
The contribution to it from the gyrocenter distribution is the
integral of −h2s /2F0s, whose evolution equation (68) can be
viewed as the gyrokinetic version of the H-theorem. The first
term on the right-hand side of this equation represents the
wave-particle interaction. Under time average, it is related to
the work done on plasma [Eq. (69)] and hence to the average
externally injected power Pext via time-averaged Eq. (70).18 In
a stationary state, this is is balanced by the second term in the
18

Note that Eq. (70) is valid not only in the integral form but also indi-

15

right-hand side of Eq. (68), which is the collisional-heating,
or entropy-production, term that also appears in Eq. (74). The
entropy cascade to collisional scales will be discussed further
in § 7.6 and § 7.7.
This concludes a short primer on gyrokinetics necessary
(and sufficient) for adequate understanding of what is to follow. Formally, all further analytical developments in this paper are simply subsidiary expansions of the gyrokinetics in the
parameters we listed in § 3.1: in § 4, we expand in (me /mi )1/2 ,
in § 5 in k⊥ ρi (followed by further subsidiary expansions in
large and small kk λmfpi in § 6), and in § 7 in 1/k⊥ρi .
4. ISOTHERMAL ELECTRON FLUID

In this section, we carry out an expansion of the electron gyrokinetic equation in powers of (me /mi )1/2 ≃ 0.02 (for hydrogen plasma). In virtually all cases of
√ interest, this expansion
can be done while still considering βi , k⊥ ρi , and kk λmfpi to
be order unity.19 Note that the assumption k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 together
with Eq. (44) mean that
k⊥ ρe ∼ k⊥ ρi (me /mi )1/2 ≪ 1,

(75)

i.e., the expansion in (me /mi )1/2 means also that we are
considering scales larger than the electron gyroradius. The
idea of such an expansion of the electron kinetic equation
has been utilized many times in plasma physics literature.
The mass-ratio expansion of the gyrokinetic equation in a
form very similar to what is presented below is found in
Snyder & Hammett (2001).
The primary import of this section will be technical: we
shall dispense with the electron gyrokinetic equation and thus
prepare the necessary ground for further approximations. The
main results are summarized in § 4.9. A reader who is only
interested in following qualitatively the major steps in the
derivation may skip to this summary.
4.1. Ordering the Terms in the Kinetic Equation

In view of Eq. (75), ae ≪ 1, so we can expand the Bessel
functions arising from averaging over the electron ring motion:


1 2
1 2
J1 (ae ) 1
J0 (ae ) = 1 − ae + * * * ,
1 − ae + * * * . (76)
=
4
ae
2
8
Keeping only the lowest-order terms of the above expansions
in Eq. (67) for hχiRe , then subsituting this hχiRe and qe = −e in
the electron gyrokinetic equation, we get the following kinetic
equation for the electrons, accurate up to and including the
first order in (me /mi )1/2 (or in k⊥ ρe ):


vk Ak T0e v2⊥ δBk
∂he c
∂he
+ vk
φ −
+
−
, he
∂t
∂z B0
c
e v2the B0
|{z} | {z } |
|{z} | {z }
{z
}
1

0

1

0

1

vidually for each wave number: indeed, using the Fourier-transformed Faraday and Ampère's laws, we have Ek * j∗k + E∗k * jk = Ek * j∗ext,k + E∗k * jext,k −
(1/4π)∂|δBk |2 /∂t. In a stationary state, time averaging eliminates the time
derivative of the magnetic-fluctuation energy, so Ek * j∗k + E∗k * jk = 0 at all k
except those corresponding to the outer scale, where the external energy injection occurs. This means that below the outer scale, the work done on one
species balances the work done on the other. The wave-particle interaction
term in the gyrokinetic equation is responsible for this energy exchange.
19 One notable exception is the LAPD device at UCLA, where β ∼ 10−4 −
10−3 (due mostly to the electron pressure because the ions are cold, τ ∼
0.1, so βi ∼ βe /10; see, e.g., Morales et al. 1999; Carter et al. 2006). This
interferes with the mass-ratio expansion.

16

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.


 
vk Ak T0e v2⊥ δBk
where
eF0e ∂
∂he
φ −
=−
−
+
. (77)
Z
X
T0e ∂t
c
e v2the B0
∂t c
ik*r 1
d 3 v vk J0 (ai )hik .
uki =
e
|{z} | {z } |
| {z }
{z
}
n
1

0

1

k

0

Note that φ, Ak , δBk in Eq. (77) are taken at r = Re . We
have indicated the lowest order to which each of the terms
enters if compared with vk ∂he /∂z. In order to obtain these
estimates, we have assumed that the physical ordering introduced in § 3.1 holds with respect to the subsidiary expansion
in (me /mi )1/2 as well as for the primary gyrokinetic expansion
in ǫ, so we can use Eqs. (3) and (12) to order terms with respect to (me /mi )1/2 . We have also made use of Eqs. (44), (46),
and of the following three relations:
r r
kk vk vthe
βi m i
∼
,
(78)
∼
ω
vA
τ me
r r
(vk /c)Ak vthe δB⊥
βi m i
1 T0e δB⊥
∼
, (79)
∼
∼
φ
ck⊥ φ
k⊥ ρe eφ B0
τ me
p
T0e v2⊥ δBk Z
βi .
(80)
∼
k
ρ
⊥
i
eφ v2the B0
τ

The collision term is estimated to be zeroth order because [see
Eqs. (48), (49)]
√ r
νei
1
τ 3/2 βi mi
.
(81)
∼
ω
Z2
me kk λmfpi

The consequences of other possible orderings of the collision
terms are discussed in § 4.8. We remind the reader that all
dimensionless parameters except kk /k⊥ ∼ ǫ and (me /mi )1/2
are held to be order unity.
(1)
We now let he = h(0)
e + he + . . . and carry out the expansion
to two lowest orders in (me /mi )1/2 .
4.2. Zeroth Order
To zeroth order, the electron kinetic equation is
 (0) 
eF0e ∂Ak
∂he
(0)
vk b̂ * ∇he = vk
,
+
cT0e ∂t
∂t c

(82)

where we have assembled the terms in the left-hand side to
take the form of the derivative of the distribution function
along the perturbed magnetic field:
∂
1 
∂ δB⊥
*∇ =
+
−
Ak , * * * .
(83)
b̂ * ∇ =
∂z B0
∂z B0

We now multiply Eq. (82) by h(0)
e /F0e and integrate over v and
r (since we are only retaining lowest-order terms, the distinction between r and Re does not matter here). Since ∇ * B = 0,
the left-hand side vanishes (assuming that all perturbations are
either periodic or vanish at the boundaries) and we get
 (0) 
Z
Z
Z
(0)
∂Ak (0)
en0e
∂he
3
3 he
=−
u = 0.
d3r
d r d v
F0e
∂t c
cT0e
∂t ke
(84)
The right-hand side of this equation is zero because the
electron flow velocity is zero in the zeroth order, u(0)
ke =
R 3
(0)
(1/n0e) d vvk he = 0. This is a consequence of the parallel Ampére's law [Eq. (60)], which can be written as follows
c
∇2 A + u ,
(85)
uke =
4πen0e ⊥ k ki

(86)

0i

The three terms in Eq. (85) can be estimated as follows
r r
u(0)
ǫvthe
βi m i
ke
∼
∼
ǫ,
(87)
vA
vA
τ me
uki
∼ ǫ,
(88)
vA
c∇2⊥ Ak
k ⊥ ρi
∼ √ ǫ,
(89)
4πen0e vA Z βi

where we have used the fundamental ordering (12) of the slow
waves (uki ∼ ǫvA ) and Alfvén waves (δB⊥ ∼ ǫB0 ). Thus, the
two terms in the right-hand side of Eq. (85) are one order of
(me /mi )1/2 smaller than u(0)
ke , which means that to zeroth order,
the parallel Ampère's law is u(0)
ke = 0.
The collision operator in Eq. (84) contains electron-electron
and electron-ion collisions. To lowest order in (me /mi )1/2 ,
the electron-ion collision operator is simply the pitch-angle
scattering operator [see Eq. (B19) in Appendix B and recall
that uki is first order]. Therefore, we may then rewrite Eq. (84)
as follows
Z
Z
h(0)
d 3 r d 3 v e Cee [h(0)
e ]
F0e
 (0) 2
Z
Z
ei
2
∂he
3
3 νD (v) 1 − ξ
− d r d v
= 0.
(90)
F0e
2
∂ξ
Both terms in this expression are negative definite and must,
therefore, vanish individually. This implies that h(0)
e must be
a perturbed Maxwellian distribution with zero mean velocity (this follows from the proof of Boltzmann's H theorem;
see, e.g., Longmire 1963), i.e., the full electron distribution
function to zeroth order in the mass-ratio expansion is [see
Eq. (52)]:


eφ
me v 2
ne
(0)
fe = F0e +
, (91)
+ he =
3/2 exp − 2T
T0e
e
2πTe /me
where ne = n0e + δne , Te = T0e + δTe . Expanding around the
unperturbed Maxwellian F0e , we get



 2
3 δTe
δne eφ
v
−
F0e ,
(92)
h(0)
=
−
+
e
n0e T0e
v2the 2 T0e

where the fields are taken at r = Re . Now substitute this solution back into Eq. (82). The collision term vanishes and the
remaining equation must be satisfied at arbitrary values of v.
This gives
T0e δne
1 ∂Ak
,
+ b̂ * ∇φ = b̂ * ∇
c ∂t
e n0e
δTe
b̂ * ∇
= 0.
T0e

(93)
(94)

4.3. Flux Conservation
Equation (93) establishes a relation between Ak , φ and
δne . The collision term is neglected because, for h(0)
e given
by Eq. (92), it vanishes to zeroth order. Therefore, Ohmic

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
resistivity is a subdominant effect in the (me /mi )1/2 expansion and the magnetic-field lines cannot be broken. Indeed,
we may follow Cowley (1985) and argue that the left-hand
side of Eq. (93) is minus the projection of the electric field
on the total magnetic field [see Eq. (37)], so we have E * b̂ =
−b̂ * ∇(T0e δne /en0e ); hence the total electric field is



T0e δne
T0e δne
−∇
(95)
E = Î − b̂b̂ * E + ∇
e n0e
e n0e
and Faraday's law becomes

∂B
= −c∇ × E = ∇ × (ueff × B) ,
∂t


c
T0e δne
ueff = 2 E + ∇
× B,
B
e n0e

(96)
(97)

4.4. Isothermal Electrons

Equation (94) mandates that the perturbed electron temperature must remain constant along the perturbed field lines.
Strictly speaking, this does not preclude δTe varying across
the field lines. However, we shall now assume δTe = const (has
no spatial variation), which is justified, e.g., if the field lines
are stochastic. Assuming that no spatially uniform perturbations exist, we may set δTe = 0. Equation (92) then reduces
to


δne eφ
F0e (v),
(98)
−
h(0)
=
e
n0e T0e
or, using Eq. (52),
δne
F0e (v).
n0e

(99)

Hence follows the equation of state for isothermal electrons:
δ pe = T0e δne .

(100)

4.5. First Order

We now subtract Eq. (82) from Eq. (77), integrate the remainder over the velocity space (keeping r constant), and retain first-order terms only. Using Eq. (98), we get




∂ δne δBk
c
δne δBk
+
φ,
−
−
∂t n0e B0
B0
n0e B0


∂uke 1 
cT0e δne δBk
= 0,(101)
,
−
Ak , uke +
+
∂z
B0
eB0 n0e B0
where the parallel electron velocity is first order:
Z
1
=
uke = u(1)
d 3 v vk h(1)
e .
ke
n0e

∼

p
k 2 ρ2
τ βi ⊥ i
kk λmfpi

me δne
ω
, (103)
mi n0e

where we have used Eqs. (44) and (81).

4.6. Field Equations
Using Eq. (98) and qi = Ze, n0e = Zn0i , T0e = T0i /τ , we derive
from the quasineutrality equation (59) [see also Eq. (63)]
Z
Zeφ X ik*r 1
δne δni
=
=−
+
e
d 3 v J0 (ai )hik , (104)
n0e n0i
T0i
n0i
k

i.e., the magnetic field lines are frozen into the velocity field
ueff . In Appendix C.1, we show that this effective velocity is
the part of the electron flow velocity ue perpendicular to the
total magnetic field B [see Eq. (C6)].

δ fe =

17
r

(102)

The velocity-space integral of the collision term does not enter
because it is subdominant by at least one factor of (me /mi )1/2 :
indeed, as shown in Appendix B.1, the velocity integration
2 2
leads to an extra factor of k⊥
ρe , so that


Z
∂he
1
2 2 δne
∼ νei k⊥
ρe
d3v
n0e
∂t c
n0e

and, from the perpendicular part of Ampère's law [Eq. (64),
using also Eq. (104)],
(

δBk βi
Z Zeφ X ik*r
1+
=
−
e
B0
2
τ
T0i
k
 )

Z
2v2⊥ J1 (ai )
1
Z
3
hik . (105)
J0 (ai ) + 2
×
d v
n0i
τ
vthi ai
The parallel electron velocity, uke , is determined from the parallel part of Ampère's law, Eq. (85).
The ion distribution function hi that enters these equations
has to be determined by solving the ion gyrokinetic equation: Eq. (55) with s = i. Note that computing the collision
term ∂hi /∂t c in this equation does not require knowledge
of he because the ion-electron collisions are subdominant in
the (me /mi )1/2 expansion [see Eq. (50)].
4.7. Generalized Energy
The generalized energy (§ 3.4) for the case of isothermal
electrons is calculated by substituting Eq. (99) into Eq. (72):

Z
Z
T0i δ fi2 n0e T0e δn2e |δB|2
. (106)
+
+
W = d3r
d3v
2F0i
2 n20e
8π
4.8. Validity of the Mass-Ratio Expansion
Let us examine the range of spatial scales in which the
equations derived above are valid. In carrying out the expansion in (me /mi )1/2 , we ordered k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 [Eq. (75)] and
kk λmfpi ∼ 1 [Eq. (81)]. Formally, this means that the perpendicular and parallel wavelengths of the perturbations must not
be so small or so large as to interfere with the mass ratio expansion. We now discuss the four conditions that this requirement leads to and whether any of them can be violated without
destroying the validity of the equations derived above.
4.8.1. k⊥ ρi ≪ (mi /me )1/2 .

This is equivalent to demanding that k⊥ ρe ≪ 1, a condition
that was, indeed, essential for the expansion to hold [Eq. (76)].
This is not a serious limitation because electrons can be considered well magnetized at virtually all scales of interest for
astrophysical applications. However, we do forfeit the detailed information about some important electron physics at
k⊥ ρe ∼ 1: for example such effects as wave damping at the
electron gyroscale and the electron heating (although the total
amount of the electron heating can be deduced by subtracting
the ion heating from the total energy input). The breaking of
the flux conservation (resistivity) is also an effect that requires
incorporation of the finite electron gyroscale physics.

18

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

F IG . 4.- The region of validity in the wave-number space of the secondary approximation-isothermal electrons and gyrokinetic ions (§ 4). It is the region
of validity of the gyrokinetic approximation (Fig. 3) further circumscribed by two conditions: kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 (isothermal electrons) and k⊥ ρe ≪ 1
(magnetized electrons). The region of validity of the strongly magnetized two-fluid theory (Appendix A.2) is also shown. It is the same as for the full two-fluid
theory plus the additional constraint k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi . The region of validity of MHD (or one-fluid theory) is the subset of this with kk λmfpi ≪ (me /mi )1/2
(adiabatic electrons).

4.8.2. k⊥ ρi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 .

If this condition is broken, the small-k⊥ ρi expansion, carried out in § 5, must, formally speaking, precede the massratio expansion. However, it turns out that the smallk⊥ ρi expansion commutes with the mass-ratio expansion
(Schekochihin et al. 2007, see also footnote 21), so we
may use the equations derived in §§ 4.2-4.6 when k⊥ ρi .
(me /mi )1/2 .
4.8.3. kk λmfpi ≪ (mi /me )1/2 .

Let us consider what happens if this condition is broken
and kk λmfpi & (mi /me )1/2 . In this case, the collisions become even weaker and the expansion precedure must be modified. Namely, the collision term picks up one extra order of
(me /mi )1/2 , so it is first order in Eq. (77). To zeroth order,
the electron kinetic equation no longer contains collisions: instead of Eq. (82), we have
vk b̂ * ∇h(0)
e = vk

eF0e ∂Ak
.
cT0e ∂t

(107)

We may seek the solution of this equation in the form h(0)
e =
H(t, Re )F0e + h(0)
,
where
H(t,
R
)
is
an
unknown
function
to
e
e,hom
(0)
be determined and he,hom is the homogeneous solution satisfying
b̂ * ∇h(0)
e,hom = 0,

(108)

i.e., h(0)
e,hom must be constant along the perturbed magnetic
field. This is a generalization of Eq. (94). Again assuming
stochastic field lines, we conclude that h(0)
e,hom is independent

of space. If we rule out spatially uniform perturbations, we
may set h(0)
e,hom = 0. The unknown function H(t, Re ) is readily
expressed in terms of δne and φ:
Z
δne eφ
δne eφ 1
=
+
−
, (109)
d 3 vh(0)
⇒ H=
e
n0e T0e n0e
n0e T0e
so h(0)
e is again given by Eq. (98), so the equations derived
in §§ 4.2-4.6 are unaltered. Thus, the mass-ratio expansion
remains valid at kk λmfpi & (mi /me )1/2 .
4.8.4. kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 .

If the parallel wavelength of the fluctuations is so long that
this is violated, kk λmfpi . (me /mi )1/2 , the collision term in
Eq. (77) is minus first order. This is the lowest-order term in
the equation. Setting it to zero obliges h(0)
e to be a perturbed
Maxwellian again given by Eq. (92). Instead of Eq. (82), the
zeroth-order kinetic equation is
 (1) 
∂he
eF0e ∂Ak
.
(110)
+
vk b̂ * ∇h(0)
=
v
k
e
cT0e ∂t
∂t c
Now the collision term in this order contains h(1)
e , which
can be determined from Eq. (110) by inverting the collision operator. This sets up a perturbation theory that in due
course leads to the Reduced MHD version of the general
MHD equations-this is what was considered in § 2. Equation (94) no longer needs to hold, so the electrons are not
isothermal. In this true one-fluid limit, both electrons and
ions are adiabatic with equal temperatures [see Eq. (112) below]. The collisional transport terms in this limit (parallel
and perpendicular resistivity, viscosity, heat fluxes, etc.) were

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
calculated [starting not from gyrokinetics but from the general Vlasov–Landau equation (36)] in exhaustive detail by
Braginskii (1965). His results and the way RMHD emerges
from them are reviewed in Appendix A.
In physical terms, the electrons can no longer be isothermal
if the parallel electron diffusion time becomes longer than the
characteristic time of the fluctuations (the Alfvén time):
r
1
1
me
1
√
⇔
k
λ
.
. (111)
&
k mfpi
kk vA
vthe λmfpi kk2
βi m i
Furthermore, under a similar condition, electron and ion temperatures must equalize: this happens if the ion-electron collision time is shorter than the Alfvén time,
p r me
1
1
.
⇔ kk λmfpi . βi
(112)
νie
kk vA
mi

(see Lithwick & Goldreich 2001 for a discussion of these conditions in application to the ISM).
4.9. Summary

The original gyrokinetic description introduced in § 3 was
a system of two kinetic equations [Eq. (55)] that evolved the
electron and ion distribution functions he , hi and three field
equations [Eqs. (59-61)] that related φ, Ak and δBk to he and
hi . In this section, we have taken advantage of the smallness
of the electron mass to treat the electrons as an isothermal
magnetized fluid, while ions remained fully gyrokinetic.
In mathematical terms, we solved the electron kinetic equation and replaced the gyrokinetics with a simpler closed system of equations that evolve 6 unknown functions: φ, Ak , δBk ,
δne , uke and hi . These satisfy two fluid-like evolution equations (93) and (101), three integral relations (104), (105), and
(85) which involve hi , and the kinetic equation (55) for hi .
The system is simpler because the full electron distribution
function has been replaced by two scalar fields δne and uke .
We now summarize this new system of equations: denoting
ai = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωi , we have
1 ∂Ak
T0e δne
,
(113)
+ b̂ * ∇φ = b̂ * ∇
c ∂t
e n0e




cT0e δne δBk
d δne δBk
+ b̂ * ∇uke = −
,(114)
−
,
dt n0e B0
eB0 n0e B0
Z
Zeφ X ik*r 1
δne
=−
+
e
d 3 v J0 (ai )hik ,
(115)
n0e
T0i
n0i
k
Z
X
c
1
uke =
∇2⊥ Ak +
eik*r
d 3 v vk J0 (ai )hik , (116)
4πen0e
n0i
k
(

δBk βi
Z Zeφ X ik*r
e
1+
=
−
B0
2
τ
T0i
k
 )

Z
2
J
(a
)
1
2v
Z
1
i
(117)
×
hik ,
J0 (ai ) + 2⊥
d3v
n0i
τ
vthi ai
and Eq. (55) for s = i and ion-ion collisions only:
Ze ∂hχiRi
∂hi c
∂hi
+ vk
+ {hχiRi , hi } =
F0i + hCii [hi ]iRi ,
∂t
∂z B0
T0i ∂t
(118)
where hCii [. . .]iRi is the gyrokinetic ion-ion collision operator
(see Appendix B) and the ion-electron collisions have been

19

neglected to lowest order in (me /mi )1/2 [see Eq. (50)]. Note
that Eqs. (113-114) have been written in a compact form,
where
∂
∂
c
d
=
+ uE * ∇ =
+ {φ, * * *}
dt ∂t
∂t B0

(119)

is the convective derivative with respect to the E × B drift velocity, uE = −c∇⊥ φ × ẑ/B0 , and
b̂ * ∇ =

∂
1 
∂ δB⊥
*∇ =
+
−
Ak , * * *
∂z B0
∂z B0

(120)

is the gradient along the total magnetic field (mean field plus
perturbation).
The generalized energy conserved by Eqs. (113-118) is
given by Eq. (106).
It is worth observing that the left-hand side of Eq. (113)
is simply minus the component of the electric field along the
total magnetic field [see Eq. (37)]. This was used in § 4.3 to
prove that the magnetic flux described by Eq. (113) is exactly
conserved. Equation (113) is the projection of the generalized
Ohm's law onto the total magnetic field-the right-hand side
of this equation is the so-called thermoelectric term. This is
discussed in more detail in Appendix C.1, where we also show
that Eq. (114) is the parallel part of Faraday's law and give a
qualitative nongyrokinetic derivation of Eqs. (113-114).
We will refer to Eqs. (113-118) as the equations of isothermal electron fluid. They are valid in a broad range of scales:
the only constraints are that kk ≪ k⊥ (gyrokinetic ordering, § 3.1), k⊥ ρe ≪ 1 (electrons are magnetized, § 4.8.1) and
kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 (electrons are isothermal, § 4.8.4). The
region of validity of Eqs. (113-118) in the wave-number space
is illustrated in Fig. 4. A particular advantage of this hybrid
fluid-kinetic system is that it is uniformly valid across the
transition from magnetized to unmagnetized ions (i.e., from
k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 to k⊥ ρi ≫ 1).
Note that in order to incorporate the collisional resistivity or the collisionless electron Landau damping effects,
one has to go to higher order in the mass-ratio expansion
(Snyder & Hammett 2001).
5. TURBULENCE IN THE INERTIAL RANGE: KINETIC RMHD

Our goal in this section is to derive a reduced set of equations that describe the magnetized plasma in the limit of small
k⊥ ρi . Before we proceed with an expansion in k⊥ ρi , we need
to make a formal technical step, the usefulness of which will
become clear shortly. A reader with no patience for this or
any of the subsequent technical developments may skip to the
summary at the end of this section (§ 5.7).
5.1. A Technical Step

Let us formally split the ion gyrocenter distribution function
into two parts:


Ze
v ⊥ * A⊥
hi =
φ−
F0i + g
T0i
c
Ri


X
Zeφk 2v2⊥ J1 (ai ) δBkk
F0i + g. (121)
+ 2
=
eik*Ri J0 (ai )
T0i
vthi ai B0
k

Then g satisfies the following equation, obtained by substituting Eq. (121) and the expression for ∂Ak /∂t that follows from

20

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.
3
= [I0 (αi ) − I1(αi )] e−αi = 1 − αi + * * * ,
(127)
2
 2
2
Z
1
2v⊥ J1 (ai )
Γ2 (αi ) =
F0i = 2Γ1 (αi ). (128)
d3v
n0i
v2thi ai

Eq. (113) into the ion gyrokinetic equation (118):
∂g
∂g c
{hχiRi , g} − hCii [g]iRi =
+ vk +
∂t
∂z B0
|
{z
}

Underneath each term in Eqs. (122-125), we have indicated
the lowest order in k⊥ ρi to which this term enters.

0

−

Ze
vk
T0i

*

1 
Ak , φ − hφiRi
B0
|
{z
}

5.2. Subsidiary Ordering in k⊥ ρi
In order to carry out a subsidiary expansion in small k⊥ ρi ,
we must order all terms in Eqs. (93-101) and (122-125) with
respect to k⊥ ρi . Let us again assume, like we did when expanding the electron equation (§ 4), that the ordering introduced for the gyrokinetics in § 3.1 holds also for the subsidiary expansion in k⊥ ρi . First note that, in view of Eq. (46),
we must regard Zeφ/T0i to be minus first order:

1



+ b̂ * ∇
|

T0e δne
v ⊥ * A⊥
−
e n0e
c
{z

 !+
Ri

}

0

Ze
+
T0i

*

Cii

F0i

Ri

+

v ⊥ * A⊥
φ −
.
F0i
c
Ri
Ri
|{z} | {z }



1

In the above equation, we have used 
compact notation in
writing out the nonlinear terms: e.g., Ak , φ − hφiRi R =
i


Ak (r), φ(r) Ri − hAk iRi , hφiRi , where the first Poisson
bracket involves derivatives with respect to r and the second
with respect to Ri .
The field equations (115-117) rewritten in terms of g are

0

0

1

=

c
1
ukke +
k2 Akk =
4πen0e ⊥
n0i
|{z} |
{z
} |
0

Z

Z

1
n0i
|

d 3 v J0 (ai )gk ,
{z

3

d v vk J0 (ai )gk = ukki ,

1

(123)

}

0

{z

(124)



 Zeφk
2 δBkk 
Z δnke
+ Γ2 (αi ) +
− 1 − Γ1(αi )
τ n0e
βi B 0
T0i
{z
} |
{z
}
| {z } |
0

0

1

=−

1
n0i
|

Z

d3v

(vk /c)Ak vthi δB⊥
1 T0i δB⊥ p
∼ βi , (130)
∼
∼
φ
ck⊥ φ
k⊥ ρi Zeφ B0

so φ and (vk /c)Ak are same order.
Since uk = uki (electrons do not contribute to the mass flow),
assuming that slow waves and Alfvén waves have comparable
energies implies uki ∼ u⊥ . As uki is determined by the second
equality in Eq. (124), we can order g [using Eq. (12)]:
uk
u⊥
ǫ
g
(131)
∼
∼
∼√ ,
F0i
vthi
vthi
βi
so g is zeroth order in k⊥ ρi . Similarly, δne /n0e ∼ δBk /B0 ∼ ǫ
are zeroth order in k⊥ ρi -this follows directly from Eq. (12).
Together with Eq. (3), the above considerations allow us to
order all terms in our equations. The ordering of the collision
term involving φ is explained in Appendix B.2.
5.3. Alfvén Waves: Kinetic Derivation of RMHD

}

0

(129)

Also, as δB⊥ /B0 ∼ ǫ [Eq. (12)],

0

 Zeφk
δBkk 
δnke
− Γ1 (αi )
+ 1 − Γ0(αi )
n0e
B0
T0i
|{z} | {z } |
{z
}

ǫ
Zeφ
√ .
∼
T0i
k ⊥ ρ i βi

(122)

2v2⊥
v2thi

J1 (ai )
gk , (125)
ai
{z
}
0

2 2
where ai = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωi , αi = k⊥
ρi /2 and we have defined
Z
1
d 3 v [J0 (ai )]2 F0i
Γ0 (αi ) =
n0i
(126)
= I0 (αi ) e−αi = 1 − αi + * * * ,
Z
2
1
J1 (ai )
2v
F0i = −Γ′0 (αi )
Γ1 (αi ) =
d 3 v 2⊥ J0 (ai )
n0i
ai
vthi

We shall now show that the RMHD equations (17-18) hold
in this approximation. There is a simple correspondence between the stream and flux functions defined in Eq. (16) and
the electromagnetic potentials φ and Ak :
Φ=

c
φ,
B0

Ak
.
Ψ = −√
4πmi n0i

(132)

The first of these definitions says that the perpendicular flow
velocity u⊥ is the E × B drift velocity; the second definition
is the standard MHD relation between the magnetic flux function and the parallel component of of the vector potential.
Deriving Eq. (17) is straightforward: in Eq. (93), we retain
only the lowest-minus first-order terms (those that contain
φ and Ak ). The result is
∂Ak
∂φ c 
+c
−
Ak , φ = 0.
∂t
∂z B0

(133)

Using
√ Eq. (132) and the definition of the Alfvén speed, vA =
B0 / 4πmi n0i , we get Eq. (17). By the argument of § 4.3,
Eq. (133) expresses the fact that that magnetic-field lines are
frozen into the E × B velocity field, which is the mean flow
velocity associated with the Alfvén waves (see § 5.4).

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
As we are about to see, in order to derive Eq. (137), we
have to separate the first-order part of the k⊥ ρi expansion. The
easiest way to achieve this, is to integrate Eq. (122) over the
velocity space (keeping r constant) and expand the resulting
equation in small k⊥ ρi . Using Eqs. (123) and (124) to express
the velocity-space integrals of g, we get


 Zeφk ∂ δnke
δBkk
∂
+
1 − Γ0(αi )
− Γ1 (αi )
∂t
T0i
∂t n0e
B0
{z
} |
{z
}
|
1

0



+


∂
c
2
ukke +
k⊥
Akk
∂z
4πen0e
|{z} |
{z
}
0

+

=

1
n0i

Z

c 1
B0 n0i
|

*

d 3 v J0 (ai ) Cii



{z

|{z}

}


v ⊥ * A⊥
F0i
c
Ri
|{z} | {z }
φ −
3

+ g

5.4. Why Alfvén Waves Ignore Collisions
Let us write explicitly the distribution function of the ion
gyrocenters [Eq. (121)] to two lowest orders in k⊥ ρi :

hi =

d 3 v J0 (ai ) {hχiRi , g}k
0



+

Multiplying Eq. (137) by 2T0i /Zeρ2i and using Eq. (132), we
get the second RMHD equation (18).
We have established that the Alfvén-wave component of the
turbulence is decoupled and fully described by the RMHD
equations (17) and (18). This result is the same as that in
§ 2.2 but now we have proven that collisions do not affect the
Alfvén waves and that a fluid-like description only requires
k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 to be valid.

1

Z

Ze
T0i

21


∂
c
c
1
+
Ak ,
∇2 Ak −
∇2 Ak = 0. (137)
∂z 4πen0e ⊥
B0
4πen0e ⊥

.

2

(134)

Ri ,k

2

Underneath each term, the lowest order in k⊥ ρi to which it
enters is shown. We see that terms containing φ are all first
order, so it is up to this order that we shall retain terms. The
collision term integrated over the velocity space picks up two
extra orders of k⊥ ρi (see Appendix B.1), so it is second order and can, therefore, be dropped. As a consequence of
quasineutrality, the zeroth-order part of the above equation
exactly coincides with Eq. (101), i.e, δni /n0i = δne /n0e satisfy the same equation. Indeed, neglecting second-order terms
(but not first-order ones!), the nonlinear term in Eq. (134) (the
last term on the left-hand side) is




Z
Z
1
1
1
c
φ,
Ak ,
d3v g −
d 3 v vk g
B0
n0i
B0
n0i


Z
δB
v2
cT0i
k 1
,
d 3 v 2⊥ g , (135)
+
ZeB0 B0 n0i
vthi
and, using Eqs. (123-125) to express velocity-space integrals
of g in the above expression, we find that the zeroth-order part
of the nonlinearity is the same as the nonlinearity in Eq. (101),
while the first-order part is




1
1
c
Zeφ
c
φ, ρ2i ∇2⊥
+
Ak ,
∇2⊥ Ak , (136)
−
B0
2
T0i
B0
4πen0e
where we have used the expansion (126) of Γ0 (αi ) and converted it back into x space.
Thus, if we subtract Eq. (101) from Eq. (134), the remainder is first order and reads


Zeφ
1
∂ 1 2 2 Zeφ c
+
ρi ∇⊥
φ, ρ2i ∇2⊥
∂t 2
T0i B0
2
T0i

v2 δBk
Ze
hφiRi F0i + 2⊥
F0i + g + * * *,
T0i
vthi B0

(138)

2 2
where, up to corrections of order k⊥
ρi , the ring-averaged
scalar potential is hφiRi = φ(Ri ), the scalar potential taken at
the position of the ion gyrocenter. Note that in Eq. (138), the
first term is minus first order in k⊥ ρi [see Eq. (129)], the second and third terms are zeroth order [Eq. (131)], and all terms
of first and higher orders are omitted. In order to compute the
full ion distribution function given by Eq. (52), we have to
convert hi to the r space. Keeping terms up to zeroth order,
we get


v⊥ × ẑ
Ze
Ze
Ze
φ(r) +
hφiRi ≃
φ(Ri ) =
* ∇φ(r) + * * *
T0i
T0i
T0i
Ωi
Ze
2v⊥ * uE
+ ...,
(139)
=
φ(r) +
T0i
v2thi

where uE = −c∇φ(r) × ẑ/B0 , the E × B drift velocity. Substituting Eq. (139) into Eq. (138) and then Eq. (138) into
Eq. (52), we find
fi = F0i +

2v⊥ * uE
v2⊥ δBk
F0i + g + * * *.
F
+
0i
v2thi
v2thi B0

(140)

The first two terms can be combined into a Maxwellian
with mean perpendicular flow velocity u⊥ = uE . These are
the terms responsible for the Alfvén waves. The remaining
terms, which we shall denote δ f ̃i , are the perturbation of the
Maxwellian in the moving frame of the Alfvén waves-they
describe the passive (compressive) component of the turbulence (see § 5.5). Thus, the ion distribution function is
#
"
(v⊥ − uE )2 + v2k
n0i
fi =
+ δ f ̃i .
(141)
exp −
vthi
(πv2thi )3/2
This sheds some light on the indifference of Alfvén waves
to collisions: Alfvénic perturbations do not change the
Maxwellian character of the ion distribution. Unlike in a neutral fluid or gas, where viscosity arises when particles transport the local mean momentum a distance ∼ λmfpi , the particles in a magnetized plasma instantaneously take on the local E × B velocity (they take a cyclotron period to adjust, so,
roughly speaking, ρi plays the role of the mean free path).
Thus, there is no memory of the mean perpendicular motion
and, therefore, no perpendicular momentum transport.
Some readers may find it illuminating to notice that
Eq. (137) can be interpreted as stating simply ∇*j = 0: the first

22

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

two terms represent the divergence of the polarization current,
which is perpendicular to the magnetic field;20 the last two
terms are b̂ * ∇ jk . No contribution to the current arises from
the collisional term in Eq. (134) as ion-ion collisions cause no
particle transport.
5.5. Density and Magnetic-Field-Strength Fluctuations

The equations that describe the density (δne ) and magneticfield-strength (δBk ) fluctuations follow immediately from
Eqs. (122-125) if only zeroth-order terms are kept. In these
equations, terms that involve φ and Ak also contain factors
2 2
∼ k⊥
ρi and are, therefore, first-order [with the exception of
the nonlinearity on the left-hand side of Eq. (122)]. The fact
that hCii [hφiRi F0i ]iRi in Eq. (122) is first order is proved in Appendix B.2. Dropping these terms along with all other contributions of order higher than zeroth and making use of Eq. (67)
to write out hχiRi , we find that Eq. (122) takes the form
 
 
dg
Z δne v2⊥ δBk
F0i
+
+ vk b̂ * ∇ g +
dt
τ n0e v2thi B0

 
v2 δBk
,
(142)
F0i
= Cii g + 2⊥
vthi B0
Ri
where we have used definitions (119-120) of the convective
time derivative d/dt and the total gradient along the magnetic
field b̂ * ∇ to write our equation in a compact form. Note
that, in view of the correspondence between Φ, Ψ and φ, Ak
[Eq. (132)], these nonlinear derivatives are the same as those
defined in Eqs. (19-20). The collision term in the right-hand
side of the above equation is the zeroth-order limit of the gyrokinetic ion-ion collision operator: a useful model form of it
is given in Appendix B.3 [Eq. (B17)].
To zeroth order, Eqs. (123-125) are
Z
δne δBk 1
−
=
d 3 v g,
(143)
n0e B0 n0i
Z
1
d 3 v vk g,
(144)
uk =
n0i


Z
Z δne
1 δBk
1
v2
+2 1+
=−
d 3 v 2⊥ g. (145)
τ n0e
βi B 0
n0i
vthi
Note that uk is not an independent quantity-it can be computed from the ion distribution but is not needed for the determination of the latter.
Equations (142-145) evolve the ion distribution function
g, the "slow-wave quantities" uk , δBk , and the density fluctuations δne . The nonlinearities in Eq. (142), contained in
d/dt and b̂ * ∇, involve the Alfvén-wave quantities Φ and Ψ
(or, equivalently, φ and Ak ) determined separately and independently by the RMHD equations (17-18). The situation
is qualitatively similar to that in MHD (§ 2.4), except now
a kinetic description is necessary-Eqs. (142-145) replace
20 The polarization-drift velocity is formally higher-order than u in the
E
gyrokinetic expansion. However, since uE does not produce any current,
the lowest-order contribution to the perpendicular current comes from the
polarization drift. The higher-order contributions to the gyrocenter distribution function did not need to be calculated explicitly because the information
about the polarization charge is effectively carried by the quasineutrality condition (59). We do not dwell on this point because, in our approach, the notion
of polarization charge is only ever brought in for interpretative purposes, but
is not needed to carry out calculations. For further qualitative discussion of
the role of the polarization charge and polarization drift in gyrokinetics, we
refer the reader to Krommes 2006 and references therein.

Eqs. (25-27)-and the nonlinear scattering/mixing of the slow
waves and the entropy mode by the Alfvén waves takes the
form of passive advection of the distribution function g. The
density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations are velocityspace moments of g.
Another way to understand the passive nature of the kinetic
component of the turbulence discussed above is to think of
it as the perturbation of a local Maxwellian equilibrium associated with the Alfvén waves. Indeed, in § 5.4, we split
the full ion distribution function [Eq. (141)] into such a local
Maxwellian and its perturbation
δ f ̃i = g +

v2⊥ δBk
F0i .
v2thi B0

(146)

It is this perturbation that contains all the information about
the passive (compressive) component; the second term in the
above expression enforces to lowest order the conservation
of the first adiabatic invariant μi = mi v2⊥ /2B. In terms of the
function (146), Eqs. (142-145) take a somewhat more compact form (cf. Schekochihin et al. 2007):




d
Z δne
v2 δBk
δ f ̃i − 2⊥
F0i + vk b̂ * ∇ δ f ̃i +
F0i
dt
τ n0e
vthi B0
 
, (147)
= Cii δ f ̃i
Ri

Z
δne 1
=
d 3 v δ f ̃i ,
n0e n0i


Z
δBk
βi 1
Z v2⊥
=−
+ 2 δ f ̃i .
d3v
B0
2 n0i
τ vthi

(148)
(149)

5.6. Generalized Energy: Three KRMHD Cascades
The generalized energy (§ 3.4) in the limit k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 is calculated by substituting into Eq. (106) the perturbed ion distribution function δ fi = 2v⊥ * uE F0i /v2thi + δ f ̃i [see Eqs. (140)
and (146)]. After performing velocity integration, we get

Z
mi n0i u2E δB2⊥
W = d3r
+
2
8π
!#
Z
2
2
 ̃2
n0i T0i Z δne 2 δBk 1
3 δ fi
+
d v
+
+
2
τ n20e βi B20 n0i
F0i

=WAW + Wcompr .

(150)

We see that the kinetic energy of the Alfvénic fluctuations
has emerged from the ion entropy part of the generalized energy. The first two terms in Eq. (150) are the total (kinetic
plus magnetic) energy of the Alfvén waves, denoted WAW . As
we learned from § 5.3, it cascades independently of the rest
of the generalized energy, Wcompr , which contains the passive
(compressive) component of the turbulence (§ 5.5) and is the
invariant conserved by Eqs. (147-149) (see Appendix D.2 for
its form in the fluid limit).
In terms of the potentials used in our discussion of RMHD
in § 2, we have
Z

mi n0i
|∇Φ|2 + |∇Ψ|2
WAW = d 3 r
2
Z

3 mi n0i
|∇ζ + |2 + |∇ζ − |2 = W⊥+ + W⊥− , (151)
= d r
2

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
where W⊥+ and W⊥− are the energies of the "+" and "−" waves
[Eq. (33)], which, as we know from § 2.3, cascade by scattering off each other but without exchanging energy.
Thus, the kinetic cascade in the limit k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 is split, independently of the collisionality, into three cascades: of W⊥+ ,
W⊥− and Wcompr .
5.7. Summary
In § 4, gyrokinetics was reduced to a hybrid fluid-kinetic
system by means of an expansion in the electron mass, which
was valid for k⊥ ρe ≪ 1. In this section, we have further restricted the scale range by taking k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 and as a result have
been able to achieve a further reduction in the complexity of
the kinetic theory describing the turbulent cascades. The reduced theory derived here evolves 5 unknown functions: Φ,
Ψ, δBk , δne and g. The stream and flux functions, Φ and Ψ
are related to the fluid quantities (perpendicular velocity and
magnetic field perturbations) via Eq. (16) and to the electromagnetic potentials φ, Ak via Eq. (132). They satisfy a closed
system of equations, Eqs. (17-18), which describe the decoupled cascade of Alfvén waves. These are the same equations
that arise from the MHD approximations, but we have now
proven that their validity does not depend on the assumption
of high collisionality (the fluid limit) and extends to scales
well below the mean free path, but above the ion gyroscale.
The physical reasons for this are explained in § 5.4. The density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations (the "compressive" fluctuations, or the slow waves and the entropy mode in
the MHD limit) now require a kinetic description in terms of
the ion distribution function g [or δ f ̃i , Eq. (146)], evolved by
the kinetic equation (142) [or Eq. (147)]. The kinetic equation
contains δne and δBk , which are, in turn calculated in terms
of the velocity-space integrals of g via Eqs. (143) and (145)
[or Eqs. (148) and (149)]. The nonlinear evolution (turbulent
cascade) of g, δBk and δne is due solely to passive advection
of g by the Alfvén-wave turbulence.
Let us summarize the new set of equations:

∂Ψ
= vA b̂ * ∇Φ,
∂t

(152)

d 2
∇ Φ = vA b̂ * ∇∇2⊥ Ψ,
dt ⊥
 


Z δne v2⊥ δBk
dg
F0i
+
+ vk b̂ * ∇ g +
dt
τ n0e v2thi B0
 

v2 δBk
= Cii g + 2⊥
F0i
,
vthi B0
Ri

(153)

(154)

−1 Z


 2
1
1
Z
v
δne
=−
+2 1+
d 3 v 2⊥
n0e
τ
βi
n0i
vthi


1
g, (155)
−2 1 +
βi

−1 Z


 2
δBk
1
1
Z
v⊥ Z
g, (156)
=−
+2 1+
d3v
+
B0
τ
βi
n0i
v2thi τ
where
d
∂
=
+ {Φ, * * *} ,
dt ∂t

b̂ * ∇ =

∂
1
+ {Ψ, * * *} . (157)
∂z vA

An explicit form of the collision term in the right-hand side of
Eq. (154) is provided in Appendix B.3 [Eq. (B17)].

23

The generalized energy conserved by Eqs. (152-156) is
given by Eq. (150). The kinetic cascade is split, the Alfvénic
cascade proceeding independently of the compressive one.
The decoupling of the Alfvénic cascade is manifested by
Eqs. (152-153) forming a closed subset. As already noted in
§ 4.9, Eq. (152) is the component of Ohm's law along the total
magnetic field, B * E = 0. Equation (153) can be interpreted as
the evolution equation for the vorticity of the perpendicular
plasma flow velocity, which is the E × B drift velocity.
We shall refer to the system of equations (152-156) as Kinetic Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (KRMHD).21 It is a
hybrid fluid-kinetic description of low-frequency turbulence
in strongly magnetized weakly collisional plasma that is uniformly valid at all scales satisfying k⊥ ρi ≪ min(1, kk λmfpi )
(ions are strongly magnetized)22 and kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2
(electrons are isothermal), as illustrated in Fig. 2. Therefore,
it smoothly connects the collisional and collisionless regimes
and is the appropriate theory for the study of the turbulent cascades in the inertial range. It does not, however, describe what
happens to these cascades at or below the ion gyroscale-we
shall move on to these scales in § 7, but first we would like to
discuss the turbulent cascades of density and magnetic-fieldstrength fluctuations and their damping by collisional and collisionless mechanisms.
6. COMPRESSIVE FLUCTUATIONS IN THE INERTIAL RANGE

Here we first derive the (nonlinear) equations that govern
the evolution of the density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations in the collisional (kk λmfpi ≪ 1, § 6.1) and collisionless (kk λmfpi ≫ 1, § 6.2) limits and discuss the linear damping
that these fluctuations undergo in the two limits. As in previous sections, an impatient reader may skip to § 6.3 where the
results of the previous two subsections are summarized and
the implications for the structure of the turbulent cascades of
the density and field-strength fluctuations are discussed.
6.1. Collisional Regime
In the collisional regime, kk λmfpi ≪ 1, the fluid limit is recovered by expanding Eqs. (152-156) in small kk λmfpi . The
calculation that is necessary to achieve this is done in Appendix D (see also Appendix A.4). The result is a closed set
of three fluid equations that evolve δBk , δne and uk :

d δne
d δBk
= b̂ * ∇uk +
,
dt B0
dt n0e

duk 2
δBk
+ νki b̂ * ∇ b̂ * ∇uk ,
= vA b̂ * ∇
dt
B0


δTi
d δTi 2 d δne
,
=
+ κki b̂ * ∇ b̂ * ∇
dt T0i 3 dt n0e
T0i

(158)
(159)
(160)

21 The term is introduced by analogy with a popular fluid-kinetic system
known as Kinetic MHD, or KMHD (see Kulsrud 1964, 1983). KMHD is derived for magnetized plasmas (ρi ≪ λmfpi ) under the assumption that kρs ≪ 1
and ω ≪ Ωs but without assuming either strong anisotropy (kk ≪ k⊥ ) or
small fluctuations (|δB| ≪ B0 ). The KRMHD equations (152-156) can be
recovered from KMHD by applying to it the GK-RMHD ordering [Eq. (12)
and § 3.1] and an expansion in (me /mi )1/2 (Schekochihin et al. 2007). This
means that the k⊥ ρi expansion (§ 5), which for KMHD is the primary expansion, commutes with the gyrokinetic expansion (§ 3) and the (me /mi )1/2
expansion (§ 4), both of which preceded it in this paper.
22 The condition k ρ ≪ k λ
⊥ i
k mfpi must be satisfied because in our estimates of the collision terms (Appendix B.2) we took k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 while assuming that kk λmfpi ∼ 1.

24

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

where




δTi 2 δBk
1
Z δne
=−
−
+
1+
νki b̂ * ∇uk , (161)
τ n0e
T0i βi B0 3v2A
and νki and κki are the coefficients of parallel ion viscosity
and thermal diffusivity, respectively. The viscous and thermal diffusion are anisotropic because plasma is magnetized,
λmfpi ≫ ρi (Braginskii 1965). The method of calculation of
νki and κki is explained in Appendix D.3. Here we shall ignore numerical prefactors of order unity and give order-ofmagnitude values for these coefficients:
νki ∼ κki ∼

v2thi
∼ vthi λmfpi .
νii

(162)

If we set νki = κki = 0, Eqs. (158-161) are the same as the
RMHD equations of § 2 with the sound speed defined as
s 
 r
βi Z 5
ZT0e 5 T0i
=
cs = vA
+
.
(163)
+
2 τ 3
mi
3 mi
This is the natural definition of cs for the case of adiabatic
ions, whose specific heat ratio is γi = 5/3, and isothermal electrons, whose specific heat ratio is γe = 1 [because δ pe = T0e δne ;
see Eq. (100)]. Note that Eq. (161) is equivalent to the
pressure balance [Eq. (22) of § 2] with p = ni Ti + ne Te and
δ pe = T0e δne .
As in § 2, the fluctuations described by Eqs. (158-161) separate into the zero-frequency entropy mode and the left- and
right-propagating slow waves with
kk vA

ω = ±p
1 + v2A /c2s

(164)

[see Eq. (30)]. All three are cascaded independently of each
other via nonlinear interaction with the Alfvén waves [in Appendix D.2, we show that the generalized energy Wcompr for
this system, given in § 5.6, splits into the three familiar invariants Wk+ , Wk− , and Ws , defined by Eqs. (34-35)].
The diffusion terms add dissipation to the equations. Because diffusion occurs along the field lines of the total magnetic field (mean field plus perturbation), the diffusive terms
are nonlinear and the dissipation process also involves interaction with the Alfvén waves. We can estimate the characteristic
parallel scale at which the diffusion terms become important
by balancing the nonlinear cascade time and the typical diffusion time:
p
kk vA ∼ vthi λmfpi kk2 ⇔ kk λmfpi ∼ 1/ βi , (165)

where we have used Eq. (162).
Technically speaking, the cutoff given by Eq. (165) always
lies in the range of kk that is outside the region of validity
of the small-kk λmfpi expansion adopted in the derivation of
Eqs. (158-160). In fact, in the low-beta limit, the collisional
cutoff falls manifestly in the collisionless scale range, i.e.,
the collisional (fluid) approximation breaks down before the
slow-wave and entropy cascades are damped and one must use
the collisionless (kinetic) limit to calculate the damping (see
§ 6.2). The situation is different in the high-beta limit: in this
case, the expansion in small kk λmfpi can be reformulated as an
√
expansion in small 1/ βi and the cutoff falls within the range
of validity of the fluid approximation. Equations (158-160) in

this limit are
d δBk
= b̂ * ∇uk ,
dt B0

duk 2
δBk
+ νki b̂ * ∇ b̂ * ∇uk ,
= vA b̂ * ∇
dt
B0


1 + Z/τ
δne
d δne
.
=
κki b̂ * ∇ b̂ * ∇
dt n0e 5/3 + Z/τ
n0e

(166)
(167)
(168)

As in § 2 [Eq. (28)], the density fluctuations [Eq. (168)] have
decoupled from the slow waves [Eqs. (166-167)]. The former
are damped by thermal diffusion, the latter by viscosity. The
corresponding linear dispersion relations are
1 + Z/τ
κki kk2 ,
5/3 + Z/τ
s


2
νki kk 2 νki kk
ω = ±kk vA 1 −
.
−i
2vA
2

ω = −i

(169)
(170)

Equation (169) describes strong diffusive damping of the density fluctuations. The slow-wave dispersion relation (170) has
two distinct regimes:
1. When kk < 2vA /νki , it describes damped slow waves.
√
In particular, in the limit kk λmfpi ≪ 1/ βi , we have
ω ≃ ±kk vA − i

νki kk2
2

.

(171)

2. For kk > 2vA /νki , both solutions become purely imaginary, so the slow waves are converted into aperiodic
decaying fluctuations. The stronger-damped (diffusive)
branch has ω ≃ −iνki kk2 , the weaker-damped one has
ω ≃ −i

i vA
i vthi
v2A
∼ −√
.
∼−
νki
βi λmfpi
βi λmfpi

(172)

This is valid until kk λmfpi ∼ 1, where it is replaced
by the collisionless damping discussed in § 6.2 [see
Eq. (189)].
6.2. Collisionless Regime

In the collisionless regime, kk λmfpi ≫ 1, the collision integral in the right-hand side of the kinetic equation (154) can be
neglected. The v⊥ dependence can then be integrated out of
Eq. (154). Indeed, let us introduce the following two auxiliary
functions:
−1


1
Z
+2 1+
Gn (vk ) = −
τ
βi


 2
Z ∞
2π
1
v⊥
×
g, (173)
dv⊥ v⊥ 2 − 2 1 +
n0i 0
βi
vthi
−1


1
Z
+2 1+
GB (vk ) = −
τ
βi

 2
Z ∞
2π
v
Z
g.
(174)
×
dv⊥ v⊥ 2⊥ +
n0i 0
vthi τ
In terms of these functions,
δne
=
n0e

Z

+∞

−∞

dvk Gn ,

(175)

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
δBk
=
B0

Z

+∞

−∞

dvk GB

(176)

and Eq. (154) reduces to the following two coupled onedimensional kinetic equations
−1


dGn
1
Z
+ vk b̂ * ∇Gn = −
+2 1+
vk FM (vk )
dt
τ
βi


 
2 δne 2 δBk
Z
1+
,
(177)
+
×b̂ * ∇
τ
βi n0e βi B0
−1


dGB
1
Z
+ vk b̂ * ∇GB =
+2 1+
vk FM (vk )
dt
τ
βi
 




Z
Z δne
Z δBk
×b̂ * ∇
1+
, (178)
+ 2+
τ
τ n0e
τ
B0
√
where FM (vk ) = (1/ πvthi ) exp(−v2k /v2thi ) is a one-dimensional
Maxwellian. This system can be diagonalized, so it splits into
two decoupled equations
Z +∞
vk FM (vk )
dG−
−
dv′k G− (v′k ), (179)
+ vk b̂ * ∇G =
b̂ * ∇
dt
Λ−
−∞
Z +∞
vk FM (vk )
dG+
+
+ vk b̂ * ∇G =
b̂ * ∇
dv′k G+ (v′k ), (180)
dt
Λ+
−∞
where
τ 1
Λ± = − + ±
Z βi

25

s


τ 2 1
1+
+ 2
Z
βi

(181)

and we have introduced a new pair of functions
s
"
#
 τ 2 1 −1
τ 2
τ 1
−
G = Gn +
+ 2
1+ + +
1+
GB , (182)
Z βi
Z βi
Z
βi

s
#

"
 τ 2 1 −1
τ 1
Z
1+
Gn .
1+ + +
G = GB + 1 +
+ 2
τ
Z βi
Z
βi
(183)
Equations (179-180) describe two decoupled kinetic cascades.
These cascades are subject to collisionless damping. Indeed, let us lineraize Eqs. (179-180), Fourier transform in
time and space, divide through by −i(ω − kk vk ), and integrate
over vk . This gives the following dispersion relation (the "−"
branch is for G− , the "+" branch for G+ )
+

ζi Z (ζi ) = Λ± − 1,
(184)
√
where ζi = ω/|kk |vthi = ω/|kk |vA βi and we have used the
plasma dispersion function (Fried & Conte 1961)
Z ∞
2
1
e−x
Z (ζi ) = √
(185)
dx
π −∞ x − ζi
(the integration is along the Landau contour). This function is
not to be confused with the parameter Z [Eq. (40)],
Formally, Eq. (184) has an infinite number of solutions.
When βi ∼ 1, they are all strongly damped with damping rates
Im(ω) ∼ |kk |vthi ∼ |kk |vA , so the damping time is comparable
to the characteristic time scale on which the Alfvén waves
cause these fluctuations to cascade to smaller scales.
It is interesting to consider the high- and low-beta limits.

F IG . 5.- A schematic log-log plot (artist's impression) of the ratio of the
damping rate of magnetic-field-strength fluctuations to the Alfvén frequency
kk vA in the high-beta limit [see Eqs. (170) and (189)].

6.2.1. High-Beta Limit

When βi ≫ 1, we have in Eq. (184)
 τ
,
G− ≃ Gn ,
Λ− − 1 ≃ −2 1 +
Z
1Z
1
G+ ≃ GB +
Gn .
Λ+ − 1 ≃ ,
βi
2τ

(186)
(187)

The "−" branch corresponds to the density fluctuations. The
solution of Eq. (184) has Im(ζi ) ∼ 1, so these fluctuations are
strongly damped:
p
ω ∼ −i|kk |vA βi .
(188)

The damping rate is much greater than the Alfvénic rate kk vA
of the nonlinear cascade. In contrast, for the "+" branch, the
damping
rate is small: it can be obtained by expanding Z(ζi ) =
√
i π + O (ζi ), which gives23
|kk |vA
|kk |vthi
= −i √
.
ω = −i √
πβi
πβi

(189)

Since Gn is strongly damped, Eq. (187) implies G+ ≃ GB , i.e.,
the fluctuations that are damped at the rate (189) are predominantly of the magnetic-field strength. The damping
√ rate is a
constant (independent of kk ) small fraction ∼ 1/ βi of the
Alfvénic cascade rate.
In Fig. 5, we give a schematic plot of the damping rate of the
magnetic-field-strength fluctuations (slow waves) connecting
the fluid and kinetic limits for βi ≫ 1.
6.2.2. Low-Beta Limit

When βi ≪ 1, we have
 τ
,
Λ− − 1 ≃ − 1 +
Z
2
Λ+ − 1 ≃ ,
βi

G− ≃ Gn +
G+ ≃ GB .

τ
GB ,
Z

(190)
(191)

23 This is the gyrokinetic limit (k /k ≪ 1) of the more general damping
k ⊥
effect known in astrophysics as the Barnes (1966) damping and in plasma
physics as transit-time damping. We remind the reader that our approach was
to carry out the gyrokinetic expansion (in small kk /k⊥ ) first, and then take
the high-beta limit as a subsidiary expansion. A more standard approach in
the linear theory of plasma waves is to take the limit of high βi while treating
kk /k⊥ as an arbitrary quantity. A detailed calculation of the damping rates
done in this way can be found in Foote & Kulsrud (1979).

26

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

F IG . 6.- Lagrangian mixing of passive fields: fluctuations develop small
scales across, but not along the exact field lines.

For the "−" branch, we again have Im(ζi ) ∼ 1, so
p
ω ∼ −i|kk |vA βi ,

(192)

which now is much smaller than the Alfvénic cascade rate
kk vA . For the "+" branch (predominantly the field-strength
fluctuations), we seek a solution with ζ = −iζ̃i and ζ̃i ≫ 1.
√
Then Eq. (184) becomes ζi Z(ζi ) ≃ 2 π ζ̃i exp(ζ̃i ) = 2/β
p i . Up
to logarithmically small corrections, this gives ζ̃i ≃ | ln βi |,
whence
p
ω ∼ −i|kk |vA βi | ln βi |.
(193)
While this damping rate is slightly greater than that of the "−"
branch, it is still much smaller than the Alfvénic cascade rate.
6.3. Parallel and Perpendicular Cascades

Let us return to the kinetic equation (154) and transform
it to the Lagrangian frame associated with the velocity field
u⊥ = ẑ × ∇⊥ Φ of the Alfvén waves: (t, r) → (t, r0 ), where
Z t
r(t, r0 ) = r0 +
dt ′ u⊥ (t ′ , r(t ′ , r0 )).
(194)
0

In this frame, the convective derivative d/dt defined in
Eq. (157) turns into ∂/∂t, while the parallel spatial gradient
b̂ * ∇ can be calculated by employing the Cauchy solution for
the perturbed magnetic field δB⊥ = ẑ × ∇⊥ Ψ:
b̂(t, r) = ẑ +

δB⊥ (t, r)
= b̂(0, r0 ) * ∇0 r,
B0

(195)

where r is given by Eq. (194) and ∇0 = ∂/∂r0 . Then

∂
b̂ * ∇ = b̂(0, r0 ) * ∇0 r * ∇ = b̂(0, r0 ) * ∇0 =
, (196)
∂s0

where s0 is the arc length along the perturbed magnetic field
taken at t = 0 [if δB⊥ (0, r0 ) = 0, s0 = z0 ]. Thus, in the Lagrangian frame associated with the Alfvénic component of
the turbulence, Eq. (154) is linear. This means that, if the
effect of finite ion gyroradius is neglected, the KRMHD system does not give rise to a cascade of density and magneticfield-strength fluctuations to smaller scales along the moving
(perturbed) field lines, i.e., b̂ * ∇δne and b̂ * ∇δBk do not increase. In contrast, there is a perpendicular cascade (cascade
in k⊥ ): the perpendicular wandering of field lines due to the
Alfvénic turbulence causes passive mixing of δne and δBk in
the direction transverse to the magnetic field (see § 2.6 for a
quick recapitulation of the standard scaling argument on the
−5/3
passive cascade that leads to a k⊥ in the perpendicular direction). Figure 6 illustrates this situation.24
24 Note that effectively, there is also a cascade in k if the latter is meak
sured along the unperturbed field-more precisely, a cascade in kz . This is
due to the perpendicular deformation of the perturbed magnetic field by the
Alfvén-wave turbulence: since ∇⊥ grows while b̂ * ∇ remains the same, we
have from Eq. (120) ∂/∂z ≃ −(δB⊥ /B0 ) * ∇⊥ .

We emphasize that this lack of nonlinear refinement of the
scale of δne and δBk along the moving field lines is a particular property of the passive (compressive) component of the
turbulence, not shared by the Alfvén waves. Indeed, unlike
Eq. (154), the RMHD equations (152-153), do not reduce to
a linear form under the Lagrangian transformation (194), so
the Alfvén waves should develop small scales both across and
along the perturbed magnetic field.
Whether the density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations develop small scales along the magnetic field has direct
physical and observational consequences. Damping of these
fluctuations, both in the collisional and collisionless regimes,
discussed in § 6.1 and § 6.2, respectively, depends precisely
on their scale along the perturbed field: indeed, the linear results derived there are exact in the Lagrangian frame (194).
To summarize these results, the damping rate of δne and δBk
at βi ∼ 1 is
2
γ ∼ vthi λmfpi kk0
,

γ ∼ vthi kk0 ,

kk0 λmfpi ≪ 1,

kk0 λmfpi ≫ 1,

(197)
(198)

where kk0 ∼ b̂ * ∇ is the wave number along the perturbed
field (i.e., if there is no parallel cascade, the wave number of
the large-scale stirring).
Whether this damping cuts off the cascades of δne and δBk
depends on the relative magnitudes of the damping rate γ for
a given k⊥ and the characteristic rate at which the Alfvén
waves cause δne and δBk to cascade to higher k⊥ . This rate
is ωA ∼ kkA vA , where kkA is the parallel wave number of the
Alfvén waves that have the same k⊥ . Since the Alfvén waves
do have a parallel cascade, assuming scale-by-scale critical
balance (3) leads to [Eq. (5)]
2/3 −1/3

kkA ∼ k⊥ l0

.

(199)

If, in contrast to the Alfvén waves, δne and δBk have no parallel cascade, kk0 does not grow with k⊥ , so, for large enough
k⊥ , kk0 ≪ kkA and γ ≪ ωA . This means that, despite the damping, the density and field-strength fluctuations should have
perpendicular cascades extending to the ion gyroscale.
The validity of the argument at the beginning of this section that ruled out the parallel cascade of δne and δBk is not
quite as obvious as it might appear. Lithwick & Goldreich
(2001) argued that the dissipation of δne and δBk at the ion
gyroscale would cause these fluctuations to become uncorrelated at the same parallel scales as the Alfvénic fluctuations by
which they are mixed, i.e., kk0 ∼ kkA . The damping rate then
becomes comparable to the cascade rate, cutting off the cascades of density and field-strength fluctuations at kk λmfpi ∼ 1.
The corresponding perpendicular cutoff wave number is [see
Eq. (199)]
1/2 −3/2

k⊥ ∼ l0 λmfpi .

(200)

Asymptotically speaking, in a weakly collisional plasma,
this cutoff is far above the ion gyroscale, k⊥ ρi ≪ 1. However, the relatively small value of λmfpi in the warm ISM
(which was the main focus of Lithwick & Goldreich 2001)
meant that the numerical value of the perpendicular cutoff
scale given by Eq. (200) was, in fact, quite close both to
the ion gyroscale (see Table 1) and to the observational estimates for the inner scale of the electron-density fluctuations
in the ISM (Spangler & Gwinn 1990; Armstrong et al. 1995).
Thus, it was not possible to tell whether Eq. (200), rather than
k⊥ ∼ ρ−1
i , represented the correct prediction.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
The situation is rather different in the nearly collisionless
case of the solar wind, where the cutoff given by Eq. (200)
would mean that very little density or field-strength fluctuations should be detected above the ion gyroscale. Observations do not support such a conclusion: the density fluctuations appear to follow a k−5/3 law at all scales larger
than a few times ρi (Lovelace et al. 1970; Woo & Armstrong
1979; Celnikier et al. 1983, 1987; Coles & Harmon 1989;
Marsch & Tu 1990b; Coles et al. 1991), consistently with
the expected behavior of an undamped passive scalar
field (see § 2.6). An extended range of k−5/3 scaling
above the ion gyroscale is also observed for the fluctuations of the magnetic-field strength (Marsch & Tu 1990b;
Bershadskii & Sreenivasan 2004; Hnat et al. 2005).
These observational facts suggest that the cutoff formula
(200) does not apply. This does not, however, conclusively
vitiate the Lithwick & Goldreich (2001) theory. Heuristically,
their argument is plausible, although it is, perhaps, useful
to note that in order for the effect of the perpendicular dissipation terms, not present in the KRMHD equations (154156), to be felt, the density and field-strength fluctuations
should reach the ion gyroscale in the first place. Quantitatively, the failure of the density fluctuations in the solar wind to be damped could still be consistent with the
Lithwick & Goldreich (2001) theory because of the relative
weakness of the collisionless damping, especially at low beta
(§ 6.2.2)-the explanation they themselves favor. The way to
check observationally whether this explanation suffices would
be to make a comparative study of the density and fieldstrength fluctuations for solar-wind data with different values
of βi . If the strength of the damping is the decisive factor,
one should always see cascades of both δne and δBk at low
βi , no cascades at βi ∼ 1, and a cascade of δBk but not δne at
high βi (in this limit, the damping of the density fluctuations
is strong, of field-strength weak; see § 6.2.1). If, on the other
hand, the parallel cascade of the compressive fluctuations is
intrinsically inefficient, very little βi dependence is expected
and a perpendicular cascade should be seen in all cases.
Obviously, an even more direct observational (or numerical) test would be the detection or non-detection of nearperfect alignment of the density and field-strength structures
with the moving field lines (not with the mean magnetic
field-see footnote 24), but it is not clear how to measure
this reliably. It is interesting, in this context, that in nearthe-Sun measurements, the density fluctuations are reported
to have the form of highly anisotropic filaments aligned with
the magnetic field (Armstrong et al. 1990; Grall et al. 1997;
Woo & Habbal 1997). Another intriguing piece of observational evidence is the discovery that the local structure of the
magnetic-field-strength and density fluctuations at 1 AU is, in
a certain sense, correlated with the solar cycle (Kiyani et al.
2007; Hnat et al. 2007; Wicks et al. 2007)-this suggests a
dependence on initial conditions that is absent in the Alfvénic
fluctuations and that presumably should have also disappeared
in the compressive fluctuations if the latter had been fully
mixed both in the perpendicular and parallel directions.
7. TURBULENCE IN THE DISSIPATION RANGE: ELECTRON RMHD
AND THE ENTROPY CASCADE

The validity of the theory discussed in § 5 and § 6 breaks
down when k⊥ ρi ∼ 1. As the ion gyroscale is approached,
the Alfvén waves are no longer decoupled from the rest of
the plasma dynamics. All modes now contain perturbations
of the density and magnetic-field strength and can, there-

27

fore, be damped. Because of the low-frequency nature of the
Alfvén-wave cascade, ω ≪ Ωi even at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 [Eq. (45)],
so ion cyclotron damping is not important, while the Landau
damping is. The linear theory of this collisionless damping
in the gyrokinetic approximation is worked out in detail in
Howes et al. (2006). Figure 7 shows the solutions of their dispersion relation that illustrate how the Alfvén wave becomes
dispersive (known as the kinetic Alfvén wave, or KAW) and
a collisionless (Landau) damping becomes important as the
ion gyroscale is reached. We stress that this transition occurs
√
at the ion gyroscale, not at the ion inertial scale di = ρi / βi
(even when βi ≪ 1, as illustrated in Fig. 7), except in the limit
of cold ions, τ = T0i /T0e ≪ 1 (see Appendix E).
The nonlinear theory of what happens at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 is very
poorly understood. It is, however, possible to make progress
by examining what kind of fluctuations emerge on "the other
side" of the transition, at k⊥ ρi ≫ 1. It turns out that another
turbulent cascade-this time of KAW-is possible in this socalled "dissipation range." It can transfer the turbulent energy down to the electron gyroscale, where it is dissipated
(probably by the electron Landau damping; see Howes et al.
2006). Some observational evidence of such a cascade is,
indeed, available in the solar wind and the magnetosphere
(Coroniti et al. 1982; Bale et al. 2005; Grison et al. 2005, see
further discussion in § 8.1.5). Below, we derive the equations that describe KAW-like fluctuations in the scale range
k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, k⊥ ρe ≪ 1 and discuss this cascade.
Because of the presence of the collisionless damping at
the ion gyroscale, only a certain fraction of the turbulent
power arriving there from the inertial range is converted into
the KAW cascade, while the rest is damped. The damping
leads to the heating of the ions, an aspect of the k⊥ ρi ∼ 1
physics that is of considerable astrophysical interest: e.g., the
efficiency of ion heating has been studied in the context of
advection-dominated accretion flows (Quataert & Gruzinov
1999, see discussion in § 8.3) and of the solar corona (e.g.,
Cranmer & van Ballegooijen 2003). The process of depositing the collisionlessly damped fluctuation energy into the ion
heat is not trivial because, as we explained in § 3.5, collisions
do need to play a role in order for heating to occur. That is
brought about by the development of a purely kinetic entropy
cascade (nonlinear phase mixing) in phase space, discussed in
§ 7.6 and § 7.7.
A short summary of this section is given in § 7.10.
7.1. Equations of Electron Reduced MHD

The derivation is straightforward: when ai ∼ k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, all
Bessel functions in Eqs. (115-117) are small, so the integrals
of the ion distribution function vanish and Eqs. (115-117) become
Zeφ
2 Φ
δne
=−
= −√
,
(201)
n0e
T0i
βi ρ i v A
c
ρi ∇2 Ψ
uke =
uki = 0, (202)
∇2⊥ Ak = − √ ⊥ ,
4πen0e
βi




δBk βi
Z
Z Zeφ p
Φ
1+
=
= βi 1 +
, (203)
B0
2
τ
T0i
τ ρi v A

where we used the definitions (132) of the stream and flux
functions Φ and Ψ.
These equations are a reflection of the fact that, for k⊥ ρi ≫
1, the ion response is effectively purely Boltzmann, with the
gyrokinetic part hi contributing nothing to the fields or flows

28

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

F IG . 7.- Numerical solutions of the linear gyrokinetic dispersion relation (for a detailed treatment of the linear theory, see Howes et al. 2006) showing the
transition from the Alfvén wave to KAW between the inertial range (k⊥ ρi ≪ 1) and the dissipation range (k⊥ ρi & 1). We show three cases: low beta (βi = 0.01),
βi = 1, and high beta (βi = 100). In all three cases, τ = 1 and Z = 1. Bold solid lines show the real frequency ω, bold dashed lines the damping rate γ, both
normalized by kk vA (in gyrokinetics, ω/kk vA and γ/kk vA are functions of k⊥ only). Dotted lines show the asymptotic KAW solution (210). Horizontal solid line
shows the Alfvén wave ω = kk vA . Vertical solid lines show k⊥ ρi = 1 and k⊥ ρe = 1. Note that the damping can be considered strong if the characteristic decay
time is comparable or shorter than the wave period, i.e., γ/ω & 1/2π. Thus, in these plots, the damping at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 is relatively weak for βi = 1, relatively
strong for low beta and very strong for high beta.

[see Eq. (52) with hi omitted; hi does, however, play an important role in the energy balance and ion heating, as explained
in §§ 7.5-7.7 below]. The Boltzmann response for ion density is expressed by Eq. (201). Equation (202) states that the
parallel ion flow velocity can be neglected. Finally, Eq. (203)
expresses the pressure balance for Boltzmann (and, therefore,
isothermal) electrons [Eq. (100)] and ions: if we write
B0 δBk
= −δ pi − δ pe = −T0i δni − T0e δne ,
4π
it follows that


δBk
Z δne
βi
1+
=−
,
B0
2
τ n0e

(204)

(205)

which, combined with Eq. (201), gives Eq. (203). We remind
the reader that the perpendicular Ampère's law, from which
Eq. (203) was derived [Eq. (64) via Eq. (117)] is, in gyrokinetics, indeed equivalent to the statement of perpendicular pressure balance (see § 3.3).
Substituting Eqs. (201-203) into Eqs. (113-114), we obtain
the following closed system of equations

∂Ψ
= vA 1 + Z/τ b̂ * ∇Φ,
(206)
∂t

vA
∂Φ
 b̂ * ∇ ρ2i ∇2⊥ Ψ .
=−
(207)
∂t
2 + βi 1 + Z/τ

Note that, using Eq. (203), Eqs. (206) and (207) can be recast
as two coupled evolution equations for the perpendicular and
parallel components of the perturbed magnetic field, respectively [Eqs. (C10) in Appendix C.2].
We shall refer to Eqs. (206-207) as Electron Reduced MHD
(ERMHD). They are related to the Electron Magnetohydrodynamics (EMHD)-a fluid-like approximation that evolves the
magnetic field only and arises if one assumes that the magnetic field is frozen into the electron flow velocity ue , while
the ions are immobile, ui = 0 (Kingsep et al. 1990):
c
∂B
∇ × [(∇ × B) × B] .
=−
∂t
4πen0e

(208)

As explained in Appendix C.2, the result of applying the
RMHD/gyrokinetic ordering (§ 2.1 and § 3.1) to Eq. (208),

where B = B0 ẑ + δB and
δBk
δB 1
= ẑ × ∇⊥ Ψ + ẑ
,
B 0 vA
B0

(209)

coincides with our Eqs. (206-207) in the effectively incompressible limits of βi ≫ 1 or βe = βi Z/τ ≫ 1. When betas are
arbitrary, density fluctuations cannot be neglected compared
to the magnetic-field-strength fluctuations [Eq. (205)] and
give rise to perpendicular ion flows with ∇ * ui 6= 0. Thus, our
ERMHD system constitutes the appropriate generalization of
EMHD for low-frequency anisotropic fluctuations without the
assumption of incompressibility.
A (more tenuous) relationship also exists between our
ERMHD system and the so-called Hall MHD, which, like
EMHD, is based on the magnetic field being frozen into
the electron flow, but includes the ion motion via the standard MHD momentum equation [Eq. (8)]. Strictly speaking, Hall MHD can only be used in the limit of cold ions,
τ = T0i /T0e ≪ 1 (see,e.g., Ito et al. 2004; Hirose et al. 2004,
and Appendix E), in which case it can be shown to reduce
to Eqs. (206-207) in the appropriate small-scale limit (Appendix E). Although τ ≪ 1 is not a natural assumption for
most space and astrophysical plasmas, Hall MHD has, due
to its simplicity, been a popular theoretical paradigm in the
studies of space and astrophysical plasma turbulence. We
have therefore devoted Appendix E to showing how this approximation fits into the theoretical framework proposed here:
namely, we derive the anisotropic low-frequency version of
the Hall MHD approximation from gyrokinetics under the assumption τ ≪ 1 and discuss the role of the ion inertial and
ion sound scales, which acquire physical significance in this
limit. However, outside this Appendix, we assume τ ∼ 1 everywhere and shall not use Hall MHD.
7.2. Kinetic Alfvén Waves
The linear modes supported by ERMHD are kinetic Alfvén
waves (KAW) with frequencies (see Fig. 7)

ωk = ±

s

1 + Z/τ
 k ⊥ ρi k k v A .
2 + βi 1 + Z/τ

(210)

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
The corresponding eigenfunctions are
q
 Φk

1 + Z/τ 2 + βi 1 + Z/τ
Θ±
∓ k⊥ Ψ k .
k =
ρi

(211)

The waves are circularly polarized. Indeed, using Eqs. (209)
and (203), the perturbed magnetic-field vector can be written
as follows
s
Θ+ + Θ−k
k⊥ Θ+k − Θ−k
1 + Z/τ
δBk
 k
== −iẑ ×
+ ẑ
,
B0
k⊥
vA
vA
2 + βi 1 + Z/τ
(212)
so, for a single "+" or "-" wave (corresponding to Θ−k = 0 or
Θ+k = 0, respectively), δBk rotates in the plane perpendicular to
the wave vector k⊥ clockwise with respect to the latter, while
the wave propagates parallel or antiparallel to the guide field.
7.3. Finite-Amplitude Kinetic Alfvén Waves

As we are about to argue for a critically balanced KAW
turbulence in a fashion analogous to the GS theory for the
Alfvén waves (§ 1.2), it is a natural question to ask how similar the nonlinear properties of a putative KAW cascade will be
to an Alfvén-wave cascade. As in the case of Alfvén waves,
there are two counterpropagating linear modes [Eqs. (210)
and (211)], and it turns out that certain superpositions of these
modes (KAW packets) are also exact nonlinear solutions of
Eqs. (206-207). Let us show that this is the case.
We might look for the nonlinear solutions of Eqs. (206-207)
by requiring that the nonlinear terms vanish. Since b̂ * ∇ =
∂/∂z + (1/vA){Ψ, * * *}, this gives
{Ψ, Φ} = 0

{Ψ, ρ2i ∇2⊥ Ψ}

=0

⇒

⇒

Ψ = c1 Φ,

(213)

ρ2i ∇2⊥ Ψ

(214)

= c2 Ψ,

where c1 and c2 are constants. Whether such solutions are
possible is determined by substituting Eqs. (213) and (214)
into Eqs. (206) and (207) and demanding that the two resulting linear equations be consistent with each other (both equations now just evolve Ψ). This is achieved if25




1
Z
Z
2
c1 = −
2 + βi 1 +
,
(215)
1+
c2
τ
τ
so real solutions exist if c2 < 0. In particular, wave packets consisting of KAW given by one of the linear eigenmodes (211) with an arbitrary shape in z but confined to a
single shell |k⊥ | = k⊥ = const, satisfy Eqs. (213-215) with
2 2
c2 = −k⊥
ρi . This outcome is, in fact, only mildly nontrivial:
in gyrokinetics, the Poisson bracket nonlinearity [Eq. (57)]
vanishes for any monochromatic (in k⊥ ) mode because the
Poisson bracket of two modes with wave numbers k⊥ and k′⊥
is ∝ ẑ * (k⊥ × k′⊥ ). Therefore, any monochromatic solution
of the linearized equations is also an exact nonlinear solution.
The additional property of the ERMHD equations is that a superposition of monochromatic KAW that have a fixed k⊥ , or,
somewhat more generally, satisfy Eq. (214) with a fixed c2 , is
still an exact solution.
Note that a similar procedure applied to the RMHD equations (17-18) returns the Elsasser solutions: perturbations of
arbitrary shape that satisfy Φ = ±Ψ. The physical difference
25

Formally speaking, c1 and c2 can depend on t and z. If this is allowed,
we still recover Eq. (215), but in addition to it, we get the evolution equation
c1 ∂c1 /∂t = vA (1 + Z/τ )∂c1 /∂z. This allows c1 = const, but there are, of
course, other solutions. We shall not consider them here.

29

between these finite-amplitude Alfven-wave packets and the
finite-amplitude KAW packets discussed above is that nonlinear interactions can occur not just between counterpropagating KAW but also between copropagating ones-a natural
conclusion because KAW are dispersive (their group velocity
along the guide field is ∝ vA k⊥ ρi ), so copropagating waves
with different k⊥ can "catch up" with each other and interact.
The calculation above is analogous to the calculation by
Mahajan & Krishan (2005) for incompressible Hall MHD
(i.e., essentially, the high-beta limit of the equations discussed
in Appendix E), but the result is more general in the sense
that it holds at arbitary ion and electron betas. The Mahajan–
Krishan solution in the EMHD limit amounts to noticing that
Eq. (208) becomes linear for force-free (Beltrami) magnetic
perturbations,
∇ × δB = λδB.

(216)

Subsituting Eq. (209) into Eq. (216) and using Eq. (203), it
is not hard to see that Eq. (216) is equivalent to Eqs. (213215) if c2 = −λ2 and the incompressible limit (βi ≫ 1 or βe =
βi Z/τ ≫ 1) is taken.
7.4. Scalings for KAW Turbulence

A scaling theory for the turbulence described by Eqs. (201207) can be constructed along the same lines as the GS theory
for the Alfvén-wave turbulence (§ 1.2). Namely, we shall assume that the turbulence below the ion gyroscale consists of
KAW-like fluctuations with kk ≪ k⊥ (Quataert & Gruzinov
1999) and that the interactions between them are critically
balanced (Cho & Lazarian 2004), i.e., that the propagation
time and nonlinear interaction time are comparable at every
scale. We stress that none of these assumptions are, strictly
speaking, inevitable26 (and, in fact, neither were they inevitable in the case of Alfvén waves). Since we have derived Eqs. (206-207) from gyrokinetics, the anisotropy of
the fluctuations described by these equations is hard-wired,
but it is not guaranteed that the actual physical cascade below the ion gyroscale is indeed anisotropic, although analysis of solar-wind measurements does seem to indicate that
at least a significant fraction of it is (see Leamon et al.
1998; Hamilton et al. 2008). Numerical simulations based
on Eq. (208) (Biskamp et al. 1996, 1999; Ng et al. 2003;
Cho & Lazarian 2004)) have revealed that the spectrum of
−7/3
magnetic fluctuations scales as k⊥ , the outcome consistent
with the assumptions stated above. Let us review the argument that leads to this scaling.
First assume that the fluctuations are KAW-like and that Θ+
and Θ− [Eq. (211)] have similar scaling. This implies
p
λ
(217)
Ψ λ ∼ 1 + βi Φ λ
ρi
(for the purposes of scaling arguments and order-ofmagnitude estimates, we set Z/τ = 1, but keep the βi dependence so low- and high-beta limits could be recovered if
necessary). The fact that fixed-k⊥ KAW packets, which satisfy Eq. (217) with λ = 1/k⊥ , are exact nonlinear solutions
of the ERMHD equations (§ 7.3) lends some credence to this
assumption.
26 In fact, the EMHD turbulence was thought to be weak by several authors, who predicted a k−2 spectrum of magnetic energy assuming
−5/2
isotropy (Goldreich & Reisenegger 1992) or k⊥ for the anisotropic case
(Galtier & Bhattacharjee 2003; Galtier 2006; see also Voitenko 1998).

30

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

Assuming scale-space locality of interactions implies a
constant-flux KAW cascade: analogously to Eq. (1),
(1 + βi)(Φλ /ρi )2
(Ψλ /λ)2
∼
∼ εKAW = const,
τKAWλ
τKAWλ

(218)

where τKAWλ is the cascade time and εKAW is the KAW energy
flux proportional to the fraction of the total flux ε (or the total
turbulent power Pext ; see § 3.4) that was converted into the
KAW cascade at the ion gyroscale.
Using Eqs. (206-207) and Eq. (217), it is not hard to see
that the characteristic nonlinear decorrelation time is λ2 /Φλ .
If the turbulence is strong, then this time is comparable to
the inverse KAW frequency [Eq. (210)] scale by scale and we
may assume the cascade time is comparable to either:
τKAWλ ∼

λ2
1 ρi v A
∼√
.
Φλ
1 + βi λ lkλ

(219)

In other words, this says that ∂/∂z ∼ (δB⊥ /B0 ) * ∇⊥ and so
δB⊥λ /B0 ∼ λ/lkλ (note that the last relation confirms that our
scaling arguments do not violate the gyrokinetic ordering; see
§ 2.1 and § 3.1). Equation (219) is the critical balance assumption for KAW. As in the case of the Alfvén waves (§ 1.2), we
might argue physically that the critical balance is set up because the parallel correlation length lkλ is determined by the
condition that a wave can propagate the distance lkλ in one
nonlinear decorrelation time corresponding to the perpendicular correlation length λ.
Combining Eqs. (218) and (219), we get the desired scaling
relations for the KAW turbulence:
1/3
ε
vA
KAW
−1/3 2/3 2/3
(220)
l
ρi λ ,
Φλ ∼
ε
(1 + βi )1/3 0

1/3 1/3 1/3 1/3
l0 ρi λ
ε
lkλ ∼
,
(221)
εKAW
(1 + βi)1/6
where l0 = v3A /ε, as in § 1.2. The first of these scaling relations
−7/3
is equivalent to a k⊥ spectrum of magnetic energy, the second quantifies the anisotropy (which is stronger than for the
GS turbulence). Both scalings were confirmed in the numerical simulations of Cho & Lazarian (2004)-it is their detection of the scaling (221) that makes a particularly strong case
that KAW turbulence is not weak and that the critical balance
hypothesis applies.
For KAW-like fluctuations, the density [Eq. (201)] and
magnetic field [Eqs. (203) and (211)] have the same spec−7/3
trum as the scalar potential, i.e., k⊥ , while the electric field
−1/3
E ∼ k⊥ φ has a k⊥ spectrum. The solar-wind fluctuation
spectra reported by Bale et al. (2005) indeed are consistent
with a transition to KAW turbulence around the ion gyroscale:
k−5/3 magnetic and electric-field power spectra at kρi ≪ 1 are
replaced, for kρi & 1, with what appears to be consistent with
a k−7/3 scaling for the magnetic-field spectrum and a k−1/3 for
the electric one (see Fig. 1). A similar result is recovered in
fully gyrokinetic simulations with βi = 1, τ = 1 (Howes et al.
2008b). However, not all solar-wind observations are quite as
straightforwardly supportive of the notion of the KAW cascade and much steeper magnetic-fluctuation spectra have also
been reported (e.g., Denskat et al. 1983; Leamon et al. 1998;
Smith et al. 2006). Possible reasons for this will emerge in
§ 7.7 and the solar wind data is further discussed in § 8.1.5.

7.5. Generalized Energy: KAW and Entropy Cascades
The generalized energy (§ 3.4) in the limit k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 is calculated by substituting Eqs. (201) and (203) into Eq. (106):
Z
Z
T0i hh2i ir δB2⊥
W = d3r
d3v
+
2F0i
8π



 
2 )
Z
βi
Z
Zeφ
n0i T0i
1+
1+
1+
+
2
τ
2
τ
T0i

=Wh + WKAW.

(222)

Here the first term, Wh , is the total variance of hi , which is
proportional to minus the entropy of the ion gyrocenter distrbution (see § 3.5) and whose cascade to collisional scales will
be discussed in § 7.6 and § 7.7. The remaining two terms are
the independently cascaded KAW energy:
(
Z
3 mi n0i
WKAW = d r
|∇Ψ|2
2


 2 )

Φ
βi
Z
Z
1+
1+
+ 1+
τ
2
τ
ρ2i
Z

mi n0i
(223)
|Θ+ |2 + |Θ− |2 .
= d3r
2

Although we can write WKAW as the sum of the energies of
the "+" and "−" linear KAW eigenmodes [Eq. (211)], which
are also exact nonlinear solutions (§ 7.3), the two do not cascade independently and can exchange
energy. Note that the
R
ERMHD equations also conserve d 3 r ΨΦ, which is readily
interpreted as the helicity of the perturbed magnetic field (see
Appendix F.3). However, it does not affect the KAW cascade
discussed in § 7.4 because it can be argued to have a tendency
to cascade inversely (Appendix F.6).
Comparing the way the generalized energy is split above
and below the ion gyroscale (see § 5.6 for the k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 limit),
we might interpret what happens at the k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 transition as
a redistrbution of the power that arrived from large scales between a cascade of KAW and a cascade of the (minus) gyrocenter entropy in the phase space. The latter cascade is the
way in which the energy diverted from the electromagnetic
fluctuations by the collisionless damping (wave-particle interaction) can be transferred to the collisional scales and deposited into heat. The concept of entropy cascade as the key
agent in the heating of the plasma was introduced in § 3.5,
where we promised a more detailed discussion later on. We
now proceed to this discussion.
7.6. Kinetic Entropy Cascade
The ion-gyrocenter distribution function hi satisfies the ion
gyrokinetic equation (118), where ion-electron collisions are
neglected under the mass-ratio expansion. At k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, the
dominant contribution to hχiRi comes from the the electromagnetic fluctuations associated with KAW turbulence. Since
the KAW cascade is decoupled from the entropy cascade, hi
is a passive tracer of the ring-averaged KAW turbulence in
phase space. Expanding the Bessel functions in the expression for hχiRi ,k [ai ≫ 1 in Eq. (67) with s = i] and making
use of Eqs. (202-203) and of the KAW scaling Ψ ∼ Φ/k⊥ ρi
[Eq. (211)], it is not hard to show that

Ze
2 J0 (ai )Φk
Ze
hχiRi ,k ≃
hφiRi ,k = √
,
T0i
T0i
βi ρ i v A

(224)

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

31

where
J0 (ai ) ≃

r


π
2
cos ai −
,
πai
4

a i = k ⊥ ρi

v⊥
,
vthi

(225)

so hi satisfies [Eq. (118)]

∂hΦiRi
2
∂hi
∂hi
+ vk
+ {hΦiRi , hi } = √
F0i + hCii [hi ]iRi
∂t
∂z
βi ρi vA ∂t
(226)
with the conservation law [Eq. (68), s = i]
Z
Z
1 dWh
d
h2
≡
d 3 v d 3 Ri i
T0i dt
dt
2F0i
Z
Z
2
∂hΦiRi
hi
=√
d 3 v d 3 Ri
∂t
βi ρ i v A
Z
Z
hi hCii [hi ]iRi
+ d 3 v d 3 Ri
.
(227)
F0i
7.6.1. Small Scales in Phase Space: Nonlinear Perpendicular
Phase Mixing

The wave-particle interaction term (the first term on the
right hand sides of these two equations) will shortly be seen
to be subdominant at k⊥ ρi ≫ 1. It represents the source of
the invariant Wh due to the collisionless damping at the ion
gyroscale of some fraction of the energy arriving from the inertial range. In a stationary turbulent state, we should have
dWh /dt = 0 and this source should be balanced on average by
the (negative definite) collisional dissipation term ( = heating;
see § 3.5). This balance can only be achieved if hi develops
small scales in the velocity space and carries the generalized
energy, or, in this case, entropy, to scales in the phase space at
which collisions are important. A quick way to see this is by
recalling that the collision operator has two velocity derivatives and can only balance the terms on the left-hand side of
Eq. (226) if
!1/2
 2
δv
νii
∂
2
∼ω ⇒
, (228)
∼
νii vthi
∂v
vthi
ω
where ω is the characteristic frequency of the fluctuations
of hi . If νii ≪ ω, δv/vthi ≪ 1. This is certainly true for
k⊥ ρi ∼ 1: taking ω ∼ kk vA and using kk λmfpi ≫ 1 (which
is the appropriate limit at and below the ion gyroscale for
most of √
the plasmas of interest; cf. footnote 22), we have
νii /ω ∼ βi /kk λmfpi ≪ 1.
The condition (228) means that the collision rate can be arbitrarily small-this will always be compensated by the sufficiently fine velocity-space structure of the distribution function to produce a finite amount of entropy production (heating) independent of νii in the limit νii → +0. The situation bears some resemblance to the emergence of small spatial scales in neutral-fluid turbulence with arbitrarily small
but nonzero viscosity (Kolmogorov 1941). The analogy is
not perfect, however, because the ion gyrokinetic equation
(226) does not contain a nonlinear interaction term that would
explicitly cause a cascade in the velocity space. Instead,
the (ring-averaged) KAW turbulence mixes hi in the gyrocenter space via the nonlinear term in Eq. (226), so hi will
have small-scale structure in Ri on characteristic scales much
smaller than ρi . Let us assume that the dominant nonlinear effect is a local interaction of the small-scale fluctuations of hi with the similarly small-scale component of hΦiRi .

F IG . 8.- The nonlinear perpendicular phase-mixing mechanism: the
gyrocenter distrbution function at Ri of particles with velocities v⊥ and v′⊥
is mixed by turbulent fluctuations of the potential Φ (E × B flows) averaged
over particle orbits separated by a distance greater than the correlation length
of Φ.

Since ring averaging is involved and k⊥ ρi is large, the values of hΦiRi corresponding to two velocities v and v′ will
come from spatially decorrelated electromagnetic fluctuations
if k⊥ v⊥ /Ωi and k⊥ v′⊥ /Ωi [the argument of the Bessel function
in Eq. (224)] differ by order unity, i.e., for
1
δv⊥ |v⊥ − v′⊥ |
=
∼
vthi
vthi
k ⊥ ρi

(229)

(see Fig. 8). This relation gives a correspondence between the
decorrelation scales of hi in the position and velocity space.
Combining Eqs. (229) and (228), we see that there is a collisional cutoff scale determined by k⊥ ρi ∼ (ω/νii )1/2 ≫ 1.27
The cutoff scale is much smaller than the ion gyroscale. In the
range between these scales, collisional dissipation is small.
The ion entropy fluctuations are transferred across this scale
range by means of a cascade, for a which we will construct a
scaling theory in § 7.6.2 (and, for the case without the background KAW turbulence, in § 7.7).
It is important to emphasize that no matter how small the
collisional cutoff scale is, all of the generalized energy channelled into the entropy cascade at the ion gyroscale eventually reaches it and is converted into heat. Note that the rate at
which this happens is in general amplitude-dependent because
the process is nonlinear, although we will argue in § 7.6.3 (see
also § 7.7.3) that the nonlinear cascade time and the parallel
linear propagation (particle streaming) time are related by a
critical-balance-like condition (we will also argue there that
the linear parallel phase mixing, which can generate small
scales in vk , is a less efficient process than the nonlinear perpendicular one discussed above).
It is interesting to note the connection between the entropy
cascade and certain aspects of the gyrofluid closure formalism developed by Dorland & Hammett (1993). In their theory, the emergence of small scales in v⊥ manifested itself as
the growth of high-order v⊥ moments of the gyrocenter distribution function. They correctly identified this effect as a consequence of the nonlinear perpendicular phase mixing of the
gyrocenter distribution function caused by a perpendicularvelocity-space spread in the ring-averaged E × B velocities
(given by huE iRi = ẑ × ∇hΦiRi in our notation) arising at and
27 Another source of small-scale spatial smoothing comes from the per2 ρ2 h that arise in
pendicular gyrocenter-diffusion terms ∼ −νii (v/vthi )2 k⊥
i ik
the ring-averaged collision operators, e.g., the second term in the model operator (B12). These terms again enforce a cutoff wave number such that
k⊥ ρi ∼ (ω/νii )1/2 ≫ 1.

32

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

below the ion gyroscale.
7.6.2. Scalings and the Phase-Space Cutoff

Since entropy is a conserved quantity, we will follow the
well trodden Kolmogorov path, assume locality of interactions in scale space and constant entropy flux, and conclude,
analogously to Eq. (1),
v8thi h2iλ
∼ εh = const,
n20i

(230)

where εh is the entropy flux proportional to the fraction of the
total turbulent power ε (or Pext ; see § 3.4) that was diverted
into the entropy cascade at the ion gyroscale, and is the cascade time that we now need to find.
By the critical-balance assumption, the decorrelation time
of the electromagnetic fluctuations in KAW turbulence is
comparable at each scale to the KAW period at that scale and
to the nonlinear interaction time (Eq. (219)):

1/3
1/3 −2/3
l ρ λ4/3
ε
λ2
∼
. (231)
(1 + βi)1/3 0 i
τKAWλ ∼
Φλ
εKAW
vA
The characteristic time associated with the nonlinear term in
Eq. (226) is longer than τKAWλ by a factor of (ρi /λ)1/2 due
to the ring averaging, which reduces the strength of the nonlinear interaction. This weakness of the nonlinearity makes it
possible to develop a systematic analytical theory of the entropy cascade (Schekochihin et al. 2008b). It is also possible
to estimate the cascade time via a more qualitative argument
analogous to that first devised by Kraichnan (1965) for the
weak turbulence of Alfvén waves: during each KAW correaltion time τKAWλ , the nonlinearity changes the amplitude of hi
by only a small amount:
∆hiλ ∼ (λ/ρi )1/2 hiλ ≪ hiλ ;

(232)

these changes accumulate with time as a random walk,
so after time t, the cumulative change in amplitude is
∆hiλ (t/τKAWλ )1/2 ; finally, the cascade time t = is the time
after which the cumulative change in amplitude is comparable to the amplitude itself, which gives, using Eq. (231),
1/3

1/3 1/3
l ρ λ1/3
ε
ρi
. (233)
(1 + βi)1/3 0 i
∼ τKAWλ ∼
λ
εKAW
vA
Substituting this into Eq. (230), we get
!1/2 
1/6
n0i εh
ε
(1 + βi)1/6 −1/3 1/6 1/6
√
hiλ ∼ 3
l0 ρi λ ,
εKAW
vthi ε
βi
(234)
−4/3
which corresponds to a k⊥ spectrum of entropy.
To work out the cutoff scales both in the gyrocenter and
velocity space, we use Eqs. (228) and (229): in Eq. (228),
ω ∼ 1/, where is the characteristic decorrelation time of hi
given by Eq. (233); using Eq. (229), we find the cutoffs:
1
δv⊥
∼
∼ (νii τhρi )3/5 ,
vthi
k ⊥ ρi

(235)

where τhρi is the cascade time (233) taken at λ = ρi .
In the argument presented above, we assumed that the scaling of hi was determined by the nonlinear mixing of hi by
the ring-averaged KAW fluctuations rather than by the waveparticle-interaction term on the right-hand side of Eq. (226).

We can now confirm the validity of this assumption. The
change in amplitude of hi in one KAW correlation time τKAWλ
due to the wave-particle-interaction term is
 1/2
Φλ
n0i λ
√
∆hiλ ∼ 3
vthi ρi
βi ρ i v A
1
n0i  εKAW 1/3
−1/3 −5/6 7/6
√
ρi λ , (236)
l
∼ 3
ε
vthi
βi (1 + βi)1/3 0
where we have used Eq. (220). Comparing this with Eq. (232)
and using Eq. (234), we see that ∆hiλ in Eq. (236) is a factor
of (λ/ρi )1/2 smaller than ∆hiλ due to the nonlinear mixing.
7.6.3. Parallel Phase Mixing

Another assumption, which was made implicitly, was that
the parallel phase mixing due to the second term on the lefthand side of Eq. (226) could be ignored. This requires justification, especially because it is with this "ballistic" term
that one traditionally associates the emergence of small-scale
structure in the velocity space (e.g., Krommes & Hu 1994;
Krommes 1999; Watanabe & Sugama 2004). The effect of
the parallel phase mixing is to produce small scales in velocity space δvk ∼ 1/kkt. Let us assume that the KAW turbulence imparts its parallel decorrelation scale to hi and use the
−1
scaling relation (221) to estimate kk ∼ lkλ
. Then, after one
cascade time [Eq. (233)], hi is decorrelated on the parallel
velocity scales
δvk
lkλ
1
∼ 1.
∼
∼√
vthi
vthi
βi (1 + βi)

(237)

We conclude that the nonlinear perpendicular phase mixing
[Eq. (235)] is more efficient than the linear parallel one. Note
that up to a βi -dependent factor Eq. (237) is equivalent to a
critical-balance-like assumption for hi in the sense that the
propagation time is comparable to the cascade time, or kk vk ∼
−1
[see Eq. (226)].
7.7. The Entropy Cascade in the Absence of KAW Turbulence

It is not currenty known how one might determine analytically what fraction of the turbulent power arriving from the
inertial range to the ion gyroscale is channelled into the KAW
cascade and what fraction is dissipated via the kinetic ionentropy cascade introduced in § 7.6 (perhaps it can only be
determined by direct numerical simulations). It is certainly
a fact that in many solar-wind measurements, the relatively
shallow magnetic-energy spectra associated with the KAW
cascade (§ 7.4) fail to appear and much steeper spectra are
detected (close to k−4 ; see Leamon et al. 1998; Smith et al.
2006). In view of this evidence, it is interesting to ask what
would be the nature of electromagnetic fluctuations below the
ion gyroscale if the KAW cascade failed to be launched, i.e.,
if all (or most) of the turbulent power were directed into the
entropy cascade (i.e., if W ≃ Wh in § 7.5).
7.7.1. Equations

It is again possible to derive a closed set of equations for all
fluctuating quantities.
Let us assume (and verify a posteriori; § 7.7.4) that the
characteristic frequency of such fluctuations is much lower
than the KAW frequency [Eq. (210)] so that the first term in

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
Eq. (113) is small and the equation reduces to the balance of
the other two terms. This gives
δne eφ
=
,
n0e T0e

(238)

meaning that the electrons are purely Boltzmann [he = 0 to
lowest order; see Eq. (98)]. Then, from Eq. (115),
Z
 τ −1 X
2Φ
1
Zeφ
≡
= 1+
eik*r
d 3 v J0 (ai )hik (239)
T0i
ρi vthi
Z
n0i
k

Using Eq. (239), we find from Eq. (117) that the fieldstrength fluctuations are
Z
δBk
βi X ik*r 1
2v2 J1 (ai )
=−
hik ,
(240)
e
d 3 v 2⊥
B0
2
n0i
vthi ai
k
which is smaller than Zeφ/T0i by a factor of βi /k⊥ ρi .
Therefore, we can neglect δBk /B0 compared to δne /n0e in
Eq. (114). Using Eq. (238), we get what is physically the
electron continuity equation:


c
∂ eφ
+ b̂ * ∇
∇2⊥ Ak + uki = 0,
(241)
∂t T0e
4πen0e
Z
X
1
eik*r
uki =
d 3 v vk J0 (ai )hik .
(242)
n
0i
k
Note that in terms of the stream and flux functions, Eq. (241)
takes the form


p
∂uki
2τ 1 ∂Φ
∂ 2 2
,
(243)
ρ ∇ Ψ = βi
+ ρi
∂z i ⊥
Z vthi ∂t
∂z

where we have approximated b̂ * ∇ ≃ ∂/∂z, which will, indeed, be shown to be correct in § 7.7.4.
Together with the ion gyrokinetic equation, which determines hi , Eqs. (238-241) form a closed set. They describe
low-frequency fluctuations of the density and electromagnetic
field due solely to the presence of fluctuations of hi below the
ion gyroscale.
It follows from Eq. (240) that δBk /B0 contributes subdominantly to hχiRi [Eq. (67) with s = i and ai ≫ 1]. It will be
verified a posteriori (§ 7.7.4) that the same is true for Ak .
Therefore, Eqs. (224) and (226) continue to hold, as in the
case with KAW. This means that Eqs. (226) and (239) form
a closed subset. Thus the kinetic ion-entropy cascade is selfregulating in the sense that hi is no longer passive (as it was
in the presence of KAW turbulence; § 7.6) but is mixed by
the ring-averaged "electrostatic" fluctuations of the scalar potential, which themselves are produced by hi according to
Eq. (239).
The magnetic fluctuations are passive and determined by
the electrostatic and entropy fluctuations via Eqs. (240)
and (241).
7.7.2. Scalings for the Electrostatic Fluctuations

From Eq. (239), we can establish a correspondence between
Φλ and hiλ (the electrostatic fluctuations and the fluctuations
of the ion-gyrocenter distribution function):
 1/2

1/2
λ
hiλ v3thi δv⊥
v4
Φλ ∼ ρi vthi
∼ thi hiλ λ, (244)
ρi
n0i
vthi
n0i

33

where the factor of (λ/ρi )1/2 comes from the Bessel function
[Eq. (225)] and the factor of (δv⊥ /vthi )1/2 results from the
v⊥ integration of the oscillatory factor in the Bessel function
times hi , which decorrelates on small scales in the velocity
space and, therefore, its integral accumulates in a randomwalk-like fashion. The velocity-space scales are related to the
spatial scales via Eq. (229), which was arrived at by an argument not specific to KAW-like fluctuations and, therefore,
continues to hold.
Using Eq. (244), we find that the wave-particle interaction
term in the right-hand side of Eq. (226) is subdominant: comparing it with ∂hi /∂t shows that it is smaller by a factor of
(λ/ρi )3/2 ≪ 1. Therefore, it is the nonlinear term in Eq. (226)
that controls the scalings of hiλ and Φλ .
We now assume again the scale-space locality and constancy of the entropy flux, so Eq. (230) holds. The cascade
(decorrelation) time is equal to the characteristic time associated with the nonlinear term in Eq. (226): ∼ (ρi /λ)1/2 λ2 /Φλ .
Substituting this into Eq. (230) and using Eq. (244), we arrive
at the desired scaling relations for the entropy cascade:
n0i  εh 1/3 1 −1/3 1/6 1/6
√ l0 ρi λ ,
(245)
hiλ ∼ 3
vthi ε
βi
 ε 1/3 v
h
7/6
√thi l0−1/3 ρ1/6
Φλ ∼
,
(246)
i λ
ε
βi
 1/3 √
ε
βi 1/3 1/3 1/3
(247)
l ρ λ ,
∼
εh
vthi 0 i
where l0 = v3A /ε, as in § 1.2. Note that since the existence
of this cascade depends on it not being overwhelmed by the
KAW fluctuations, we should have εKAW ≪ ε and εh = ε −
εKAW ≈ ε.
The scaling for the ion-gyrocenter distribution function,
−4/3
Eq. (245), implies a k⊥ spectrum-the same as for the KAW
turbulence [Eq. (234)]. The scaling for the the cascade time,
Eq. (247), is also similar to that for the KAW turbulence
[Eq. (233)]. Therefore the velocity- and gyrocenter-space cutoffs are still given by Eq. (235), where τhρi is now given by
Eq. (247) taken at λ = ρi .
A new feature is the scaling of the scalar potential, given by
−10/3
Eq. (246), which corresponds to a k⊥ spectrum (unlike the
KAW spectrum, § 7.4). This is a measurable prediction for the
electrostatic fluctuations: the implied electric-field spectrum
−4/3
is k⊥ . From Eq. (238), we also conclude that the density
fluctuations should have the same spectrum as the scalar po−10/3
tential, k⊥ -another measurable prediction.
The scalings derived above for the spectra of the ion distribution function and of the scalar potential appear to have been
confirmed in the gyrokinetic simulations by Tatsuno et al.
(2008), who studied decaying electrostatic gyrokinetic turbulence in two spatial dimensions.
7.7.3. Parallel Cascade and Parallel Phase Mixing

We have again ignored the ballistic term (the second on
the left-hand side) in Eq. (226). We will estimate the efficiency of the parallel spatial cascade of the ion entropy and of
the associated parallel phase mixing by making a conjecture
analogous to the critical balance: assuming that any two perpendicular planes only remain correlated provided particles
can stream between them in one nonlinear decorrelation time
(cf. § 1.2 and § 7.6.3), we conclude that the parallel particle-

34

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

streaming frequency kk vk should be comparable at each scale
to the inverse nonlinear time −1 , so
kk vthi ∼ 1.

(248)

As we explained in § 7.6.3, the parallel scales in the velocity
space generated via the ballistic term are related to the parallel
wave numbers by δvk ∼ 1/kkt. From Eq. (248), we find that
after one cascade time , the typical parallel velocity scale is
δvk /vthi ∼ 1, so the parallel phase mixing is again much less
efficient than the perpendicular one.
7.7.4. Scalings for the Magnetic Fluctuations

The scaling law for the fluctuations of the magnetic-field
strength follows immediately from Eqs. (240) and (246):
p −1/3 −11/6 13/6
δBkλ
λ Φλ
λ ,
∼ βi
∼ βi l0 ρi
B0
ρi ρi vthi

(249)

−16/3

whence the spectrum of these fluctuations is k⊥ .
The scaling of Ak (the perpendicular magnetic fluctuations)
depends on the relation between kk and k⊥ . Indeed, the ratio
between the first and the third terms on the left-hand side of
Eq. (241) [or, equivalently, between the first and second terms
−1
on the right-hand side of Eq. (243)] is ∼ kk vthi . For a critically balanced cascade, this makes the two terms comparable
[Eq. (248)]. Using the first term to work out the scaling for the
perpendicular magnetic fluctuations, we get, using Eq. (246),
p −1/3 −11/6 13/6
δB⊥λ
λ Φλ
1 Ψλ
λ , (250)
∼
∼ βi
∼ βi l0 ρi
B0
λ vA
ρi ρi vthi

Since ρi /ρe ∼ (τ mi /me )1/2 /Z is not a very large number,
the dissipation range is not very wide. It then conceivable
that the observed spectra are not true power laws but simply
nonasymptotic superpositions of the electrostatic and KAW
spectra with the observed range of "effective" spectral exponents due to varying values of the spectral break (251) between the two cascades.28
The value of εKAW /ε specific to any particular set of parameters (βi , τ , etc.) is set by what happens at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1-clearly a
crucial place for determining the properties of the turbulence
in the dissipation range, just as it is for solving the problem
of ion heating mentioned at the beginning of § 7 (see § 8.1.5,
§ 8.3 for further discussion).
7.8. Below the Electron Gyroscale: The Last Cascade
Finally, let us consider what happens when k⊥ ρe ≫ 1. At
these scales, we have to return to the full gyrokinetic system of equations. The quasineutrality [Eq. (59)], parallel
[Eq. (60)] and perpendicular [Eq. (64)] Ampère's law become
−1 X

Z
eφ
1
Z
eik*r
= − 1+
d 3 v J0 (ae )hek , (252)
T0e
τ
n
0e
k
Z
X
c
2
ik*r 1
∇ Ak =
e
d 3 v vk J0 (ae )hek , (253)
4πen0e ⊥
n0e
k
Z
δBk
βe X ik*r 1
2v2 J1 (ae )
=−
hek , (254)
e
d 3 v 2⊥
B0
2
n0e
vthe ae
k

1. In Eq. (113), ∂Ak /∂t ≪ cb̂*∇φ, so Eq. (238) holds (the
electrons remain Boltzmann). This means that no KAW
can be excited by the cascade.

where βe = βi Z/τ . We have discarded the velocity integrals
of hi both because the gyroaveraging makes them subdominant in powers of (me /mi )1/2 and because the fluctuations
of hi are damped by collisions [assuming the collisional cutoff given by Eq. (235) lies above the electron gyroscale]. To
Eqs. (252-254), we must append the gyrokinetic equation for
he [Eq. (55) with s = e], thus closing the system.
The type of turbulence described by these equations is very
similar to that discussed in § 7.7. It is easy to show from
Eqs. (252-254) that

2. δB⊥ /B0 ≪ kk /k⊥ , so b̂ * ∇ ≃ ∂/∂z in Eq. (241). This
means that field lines are not significantly perturbed.

δBk
βe eφ
δB⊥
∼
∼
.
B0
B0
k⊥ ρe T0e

3. In the expression for hχiRi [Eq. (67)], vk Ak /c ≪ φ, so
Eq. (226) holds. This means that the electrostatic fluctuations dominate the cascade.

Hence the magnetic fluctuations are subdominant in the expression for hχiRe [Eq. (67) with s = e and ae ≫ 1], so
hχiRe ≃ hφiRe . The electron gyrokinetic equation then is


∂he c
∂he
∂he
,
(256)
+ vk
+ {hφiRe , he } =
∂t
∂z B0
∂t c

which is the same scaling as for δBk /B0 [Eq. (249)].
Using Eq. (250) together with Eqs. (246) and (247), it is
now straightforward to confirm the three assumptions made
in § 7.7.1 that we promised to verify a posteriori:

7.7.5. Cascades Superposed?

The spectra of magnetic fluctuations obtained in § 7.7.4 are
very steep-steeper, in fact, than those normally observed in
the dissipation range of the solar wind. One might speculate
that the observed spectra may be due to a superposition of
the two cascades realizable below the ion gyroscale: a highfrequency cascade of KAW (§ 7.4) and a low-frequency cascade of electrostatic fluctuations due to the ion entropy fluctuations (§ 7.7). Such a superposition could happen if the power
going into the KAW cascade is relatively small, εKAW ≪ ε.
One then expects an electrostatic cascade to be set up just
below the ion gyroscale with the KAW cascade superceding
it deeper into the dissipation range. Comparing Eqs. (220)
and (246), we can estimate the position of the spectral break:
2/3
.
(251)
k⊥ ρi ∼ ε/εKAW

(255)

where the wave-particle interaction term in the right-hand side
has been dropped because it can be shown to be small via the
same argument as in § 7.7.2.
Together with Eq. (252), Eq. (256) describes the kinetic cascade of electron entropy from the electron gyroscale down to
the scale at which electron collisions can dissipate it into heat.
This cascade the result of collisionless damping of KAW at
28 Several alternative theories that aim to explain the dissipation-range
spectra exist: e.g., Voitenko (1998); Leamon et al. (1999); Stawicki et al.
(2001); Howes et al. (2008a) and a number of others (Gosh et al. 1996;
Krishan & Mahajan 2004; Gogoberidze 2005; Galtier & Buchlin 2007;
Alexandrova et al. 2008)-these latter papers, however, use the Hall MHD
description of plasma, which is not strictly applicable to the solar wind (see
Appendix E).

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
k⊥ ρe ∼ 1, whereby the power in the KAW cascade is converted into the electron-entropy fluctuations: indeed, in the
limit k⊥ ρe ≫ 1, the generalized energy is simply
Z
Z
T0e h2e
.
(257)
W = d 3 v d 3 Re
2F0e
The same scaling arguments as in § 7.7.2 apply and scaling
relations analogous to Eqs. (245-247), and (249) duly follow:

1/2
n0e  εKAW 1/3 1 me
−1/3
1/6
heλ ∼ 3
, (258)
l0 ρ1/6
e λ
ε
βe m i
vthe
ε
1/3  1 m 1/2
e
KAW
−1/3
7/6
Φλ ∼
, (259)
vthe l0 ρ1/6
e λ
ε
βe m i

1/3 
1/2 1/3 1/3 1/3
l0 ρe λ
ε
mi
∼
βe
,
(260)
εKAW
me
vthe

1/2
me
δBλ  εKAW 1/3
−1/3
βe
∼
l0 ρe−11/6 λ13/6 , (261)
B0
ε
mi

where l0 = v3A /ε, as in § 1.2. The formula for the collisional
cutoffs in the wavenumber and velocity space is analogous to
Eq. (235):
1
δv⊥
∼
∼ (νei τρe )3/5 ,
vthi
k ⊥ ρi

(262)

where τρe is the cascade time (260) taken at λ = ρe .
7.9. Validity of Gyrokinetics in the Dissipation Range
As the kinetic cascade takes the (generalized) energy to ever
smaller scales, the frequency ω of the fluctuations increases.
In applying the gyrokinetic theory, one must be mindful of
the need for this frequency to stay smaller than Ωi . Using
the scaling formulae for the characteristic times of the fluctuations derived above [Eqs. (231), (247) and (260)], we can
determine the conditions for ω ≪ Ωi . Thus, for the gyrokinetic theory to be valid everywhere in the inertial range, we
must have
 1/2
l0
3/4
(263)
k ⊥ ρ i ≪ βi
ρi
3/2

at all scales down to k⊥ ρi ∼ 1, i.e., ρi /l0 ≪ βi , not a very
stringent condition.
Below the ion gyroscale, the KAW cascade (§ 7.4) remains
in the gyrokinetic regime as long as
 1/4
1/4

l0
ε
3/8
1/4
βi (1 + βi)
(264)
k ⊥ ρi ≪
εKAW
ρi
(we are assuming Ti /Te ∼ 1 everywhere). The condition for
this still to be true at the electron gyroscale is
 2
ε
me
ρi
3/2
≪
βi (1 + βi)
.
(265)
l0
εKAW
mi
The ion entropy fluctuations passively mixed by the KAW turbulence (§ 7.6) satisfy Eq. (264) at all scales down to the the
ion collisional cutoff [Eq. (235)] if

3/4
 1/4
λmfpi
ε
ρi
9/8
≪
βi (1 + βi)3/4
.
(266)
l0
εKAW
l0

35

Note that the condition for the ion collisional cutoff to lie
above the electron gyroscale is
1/3

 5/6  2/3
p
λmfpi
ρi
ε
mi
1/3
≪
.
βi (1 + βi)
l0
εKAW
me
l0
(267)
In the absence of KAW turbulence, the pure ion-entropy cascade (§ 7.7) remains gyrokinetic for
3/2 l0

k ⊥ ρ i ≪ βi

ρi

.

(268)

This is valid at all scales down to the ion collisional cutoff
provided λmfpi /l0 ≪ βi3 (l0 /ρi ), an extremely weak condition,
which is always satisfied. This is because the ion-entropy
fluctuations in this case have much lower frequencies than in
the KAW regime. The ion collisional cutoff lies above the
electron gyroscale if, similarly to Eq. (267),
 5/6  2/3
p
λmfpi
mi
ρi
≪ βi
.
(269)
l0
me
l0
If the condition (267) is satisfied, all fluctuations of the ion
distribution function are damped out above the electron gyroscale. This means that below this scale, we only need the
electron gyrokinetic equation to be valid, i.e., ω ≪ Ωe . The
electron-entropy cascade (§ 7.8), whose characteristic time
scale is given by Eq. (260), satisfies this condition for


 3/2
ε
mi
l0
3/2
k ⊥ ρe ≪
βe
.
(270)
εKAW
me
ρe

This is valid at all scales down to the electron
collisional cutoff [Eq. (262)] provided λmfpe /l0 ≪
(ε/εKAW)2 βe3 (mi /me )3 (l0 /ρe ), which is always satisfied.
Within the formal
expansion we have adopted (k⊥ ρi ∼ 1
√
and kk λmfpi ∼ βi ), it is not hard to see that λmfpi /l0 ∼ ǫ2
and ρi /l0 ∼ ǫ3 . Since all other parameters (me /mi , βi , βe etc.)
are order unity with respect to ǫ, all of the above conditions
for the validity of the gyrokinetics are asymptotically correct
by construction. However, in application to real astrophysical
plasmas, one should always check whether this construction
holds. For example, substituting the relevant parameters for
the solar wind shows that the gyrokinetic approximation is, in
fact, likely to start breaking down somewhere between the ion
and electron gyroscales (Howes et al. 2008a, see this paper
also for a set of numerical tests of the validity of gyrokinetics
in the dissipation range, and a linear theory of the conversion
of KAW into ion-cyclotron-damped Bernstein waves). This
realeases a variety of high-frequency wave modes, which may
be participating in the turbulent cascade around and below the
electron gyroscale (see, e.g., the recent detailed observations
of these scales in the magnetosheath by Mangeney et al. 2006;
Lacombe et al. 2006 or the early high-frequency solar wind
spectra measured by Denskat et al. 1983).
7.10. Summary

In this section, we have analyzed the turbulence in the dissipation range, which turned out to have many more essentially
kinetic features than the inertial range.
At the ion gyroscale, k⊥ ρi ∼ 1, the kinetic cascade rearranged itself into two distinct components: part of the (generalized) energy arriving from the inertial range was collisionlessly damped, giving rise to a purely kinetic cascade of ion-

36

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

entropy fluctuations, the rest was converted into a cascade of
Kinetic Alfvén Waves (KAW).
The KAW cascade is described by two fluid-like equations for √
two scalar functions, the magnetic flux function
Ψ = −Ak / 4πmi n0i and the scalar potential, expressed, for
continuity with the results of § 5, in terms of the function
Φ = (c/B0)φ. The equations are (see § 7.1)

∂Ψ
= vA 1 + Z/τ b̂ * ∇Φ,
∂t

vA
∂Φ
 b̂ * ∇ ρ2i ∇2⊥ Ψ ,
=−
∂t
2 + βi 1 + Z/τ

(271)

−1/3

(272)

We call Eqs. (271-273) the Electron Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (ERMHD).
The ion-entropy cascade is described by the ion gyrokinetic
equation:
(274)

The ion distribution function is mixed by the ring-averaged
scalar potential and undergoes a cascade both in the velocity
and gyrocenter space-this phase-space cascade is essential
for the conversion of the turbulent energy into the ion heat,
which can ultimately only be done by collisions (see § 7.6).
If the KAW cascade is strong (its power εKAW is an orderunity fraction of the total injected turbulent power ε), it determines Φ in Eq. (274), so the ion-entropy cascade is passive
with respect to the KAW turbulence. Equations (271-272) and
(274) form a closed system that determines the three functions Φ, Ψ, hi , of which the latter is slaved to the first two.
One can also compute δne and δBk , which are proportional
to Φ [Eq. (273)]. The generalized energy conserved by these
equations is given by Eq. (222).
If the KAW cascade is weak (εKAW ≪ ε), the ion-entropy
cascade dominates the turbulence in the dissipation range and
drives low-frequency mostly electrostatic fluctuations, with a
subdominant magnetic component. These are given by the
following relations (see § 7.7)
Z
ρi vthi X ik*r 1
Φ=
e
d 3 v J0 (ai )hik ,
(275)
2(1 + τ /Z)
n0i
k

δne 2Z Φ
=
,
n0e τ ρi vthi
p X ik*r
e ×
Ψ = ρ i βi

(276)

k


i ∂
J0 (ai )
1
h , (277)
− vk
d v
2 ρ2 ik
1 + Z/τ kk ∂t
k⊥
i
Z
δBk
βi X ik*r 1
2v2 J1 (ai )
e
=−
hik ,
(278)
d 3 v 2⊥
B0
2
n0i
vthi ai
1
n0i

Z

3

EE (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥ ,

−7/3

−7/3

En (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥ ,

EB (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥ . (279)

For the ion- and electron-entropy cascades (§ 7.6 and § 7.8),

where b̂ * ∇ = ∂/∂z + (1/vA){Ψ, * * *}. The density and
magnetic-field-strength fluctuations are directly related to the
scalar potential:


δBk p
Φ
2 Φ
δne
Z
= −√
,
= βi 1 +
. (273)
n0e
B0
τ ρi v A
βi ρ i v A

∂hi
∂hi
+ vk
+ {hΦiRi , hi } = hCii [hi ]iRi .
∂t
∂z

The fluid and kinetic models summarized above are valid
between the ion and electron gyroscales. Below the electron
gyroscale, the collisionless damping of the KAW cascade converts it into a cascade of electron entropy, similar in nature to
the ion-entropy cascade (§ 7.8).
The KAW cascade and the low-frequency turbulence associated with the ion-entropy cascade have distinct scaling behaviors. For the KAW cascade, the spectra of the electric,
density and magnetic fluctuations are (§ 7.4)



k

where ai = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωi , Equations (274) and (275) form a closed
system for Φ and hi . The rest of the fields, namely δne , Ψ and
δBk , are slaved to hi via Eqs. (276-278).

−4/3

EE (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥ ,

−10/3

En (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥

,

−16/3

EB (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥

.
(280)
We argued in § 7.7.5 that the observed spectra in the dissipation range of the solar wind could be the result of a superposition of these two cascades.
8. DISCUSSION OF ASTROPHYSICAL APPLICATIONS

We have so far only occasionally referred to some relevant
observational evidence for space plasmas (mostly solar wind)
and the ISM. We now discuss in more detail how the theoretical framework laid out above applies to these and other
astrophysical plasmas.
8.1. Space Plasmas-Solar Wind
The solar wind is a unique laboratory for studying plasma
turbulence in astrophysical conditions because it is the only
case in which direct in situ measurements of all interesting quantities are possible. Observations of the fluctuating
magnetic and velocity fields have been done since the 1960s
(Coleman 1968) and a vast literature now exists on their spectra, anisotropy, Alfvénic character and many other aspects (a
short recent review is Horbury et al. 2005; three long ones are
Tu & Marsch 1995; Bruno & Carbone 2005; Marsch 2006).
It is not our aim here to provide a comprehensive survey of
what is known about plasma turbulence in the solar wind. We
shall limit our discussion to a few points that we consider important. A more extended and quantitative discussion of the
application of the gyrokinetic theory to the turbulence in the
slow solar wind was given by Howes et al. (2008a).
Note that two other space plasmas often provide interesting
insights into the properties of collisionless plasma turbulence:
the magnetosheath (see a short review by Alexandrova 2008)
and the geotail (see reviews by Borovsky & Funsten 2003;
Petrukovich 2005). We will not discuss the distinguishing
features of these plasmas, but will mention (and have mentioned above) a few results that in our view complement the
observational picture emerging from the solar-wind data.
8.1.1. Alfvénic Nature of Turbulence

The presence of Alfvén waves in the solar wind has been
a confirmed fact since Belcher & Davis (1971). These are
detected at low frequencies (large scales)-their spectral
signature is a f −1 spectrum of magnetic-field fluctuations,
where, by the Taylor (1938) hypothesis, the frequency-towave-number relationship is f ∼ k * Vsw , where Vsw is the
solar-wind mean velocity (it is highly supersonic and superAlfvénic and far exceeds the fluctuating velocities: Vsw ∼
800 km/s in the fast wind, Vsw ∼ 300 km/s in the slow wind).
The f −1 spectrum corresponds to a uniform distribution of

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
scales/frequencies of waves launched by the coronal activity near the Sun. Nonlinear interaction of these waves gives
rise to an Alfvénic turbulent cascade of the type that was discussed above. The effective outer scale of this cascade can
be detected as a break point where the f −1 scaling steepens
to the Kolmogorov slope f −5/3 (see Bavassano et al. 1982;
Marsch & Tu 1990a; Horbury et al. 1996 for fast-wind results; for a discussion on the effective outer scale in the slow
wind at 1 AU, see Howes et al. 2008a). The particular scale at
which this happens increases with the distance from the Sun
(Bavassano et al. 1982), reflecting the more developed state
of the turbulence at later stages of evolution. At 1 AU, the
outer scale is roughly in the range of 105 − 106 km; the f −5/3
range extends down to frequencies that correspond to a few
times the ion gyroradius (102 − 103 km; see Table 1).
The strongest confirmation of the Alfvénic nature of the turbulence in the f −5/3 range is achieved by comparing the spectra of electric and magnetic fluctuations-these follow each
other with remarkable precision (Bale et al. 2005, see Fig. 1),
as they should do for Alfvénic fluctuations. Indeed, as we
showed in § 5.3, for k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, these fluctuations are rigorously described by the RMHD equations and we should have
cφ/B0 ≡ Φ = ±Ψ (see § 2.2 and § 2.3), whence
2
|Ek |2 = k⊥
|φk |2 =

v2
B20 2
k⊥ |Ψk |2 = A2 |δB⊥k |2
2
c
c

(281)

(in other words, to lowest order in ǫ and k⊥ ρi , the plasma
velocity is the E × B drift velocity, u⊥ = cE
√ × ẑ/B0 , which, in
an Alfvén wave, should be u⊥ = ±δB⊥ / 4πmi n0i ).
It is an important point that very high accuracy is claimed
for the determination of the f −5/3 scaling in the solar
wind observations: the measured spectral exponent is between 1.6 and 1.7; agreement with Kolmogorov value 1.67
is often reported to be within a few percent (see, e.g.,
Horbury et al. 1996; Leamon et al. 1998; Bale et al. 2005;
Alexandrova et al. 2008; Horbury et al. 2008))29 . Thus, the
−3/2
data does not appear to be consistent with a k⊥ spectrum
observed in the MHD simulations with a strong mean field
(Maron & Goldreich 2001; Müller et al. 2003; Mason et al.
2007) and defended on theoretical grounds in the recent
modifications of the GS theory by Boldyrev (2006) and by
Gogoberidze (2007) (see footnote 8). This discrepancy between observations and simulations remains an unresolved
theoretical issue. It is probably best addressed by numerical
modeling of the RMHD equations (§ 2.2) and by a detailed
analysis of the structure of the Alfvénic fluctuations measured
in the solar wind.
29 See, however, a somewhat wider scatter of spectral indices given by
Smith et al. 2006 and, more disturbingly, an extraordinary recent result by
Podesta et al. (2006), who claim different spectral indices for velocity and
magnetic fluctuations-3/2 and 5/3, respectively. This result, which seems
to have been independently confirmed (J. E. Borovsky 2008, private communication), is puzzling because because it would seem to imply a hydrodynamically dominated turbulence (uλ ≫ δBλ ) deep in the inertial range,
and it is not clear how perpendicular velocity fluctuations u⊥λ can fail to
produce Alfvénic displacements and, therefore, perpendicular magnetic field
fluctuations δB⊥λ with matching energies. The only plausible explanation
appears to be either that the velocity field in these measurements is polluted
by some non-Alfvénic component (which also remains to be explained) or
that the flattening of the velocity spectrum is, in fact, due to some form of
energy injection into the velocity fluctuations at scales approaching the ion
gyroscale. Note that the simultaneous measurements by Bale et al. (2005) of
the magnetic- and electric-field spectra (discussed above), which are guaranteed to extract the Alfvénic part of the velocity field, do not find any departure
from Alfvénicity in the inertial range.

37

8.1.2. Anisotropy

The solar wind presents the best hope for a quantitative
2/3
check of the GS relation kk ∼ k⊥ [see Eq. (5)] in a real astrophysical turbulent plasma. Studies of anisotropy of turbulent
fluctuations have progressed from merely detecting their elongation along the magnetic field (Belcher & Davis 1971)-to
fitting data to an ad hoc model mixing a 2D perpendicular and
a 1D parallel ("slab") turbulent component in some proportion30 (Matthaeus et al. 1990; Bieber et al. 1996; Dasso et al.
2005; Hamilton et al. 2008)-to formal systematic unbiased
analyses showing the persistent presence of anisotropy at all
scales (Bigazzi et al. 2006; Sorriso-Valvo et al. 2006)- to direct measurements of three-dimensional correlation functions
(Osman & Horbury 2007)-and finally to computing spectral
exponents at fixed angles between k and B0 (Horbury et al.
2008). The latter authors appear to have achieved the first direct confirmation of the GS theory by demonstrating that the
−5/3
magnetic-energy spectrum scales as k⊥ in wave numbers
perpendicular to the mean field and as kk−2 in wave numbers
parallel to it [consistent with the first relation in Eq. (4)].
Latest measurements done by the four-spacecraft Cluster
mission offer a promise of direct detailed studies of the threedimensional spatial structure of the turbulent fluctuations in
the solar wind and the magnetosphere (Osman & Horbury
2007; Sahraoui et al. 2006; Narita et al. 2006).
8.1.3. Density and Magnetic-Field-Strength Fluctuations

The density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations (the
"compressive" fluctuations) constitute the passive component of the low (Alfvénic) frequency turbulence, energetically decoupled from and mixed by the Alfvénic cascade
(§ 5.5; these are slow and entropy modes in the collisional
MHD limit-see § 2.4). These fluctuations are expected to
be pressure-balanced, as expressed by Eq. (22) or, more generally in gyrokinetics, by Eq. (65). There is, indeed, strong
evidence that magnetic and thermal pressures in the solar
wind are anticorrelated, although there are some indications
of the presence of compressive, fast-wave-like fluctuations as
well (Roberts 1990; Burlaga et al. 1990; Marsch & Tu 1993;
Bavassano et al. 2004).
Measurements of density and field-strength fluctuations done by a variety of different methods both at
1 AU (Celnikier et al. 1983, 1987; Marsch & Tu 1990b;
Bershadskii & Sreenivasan
2004;
Hnat et al.
2005;
Kellogg & Horbury 2005; Alexandrova et al. 2008) and
near the Sun (Lovelace et al. 1970; Woo & Armstrong 1979;
Coles & Harmon 1989; Coles et al. 1991) show fluctuation
levels of order 10% and spectra that appear to have a
k−5/3 scaling above scales of order 102 − 103 km, which
approximately corresponds to the ion gyroscale.31 The Kolmogorov value of the spectral exponent is, as in the case of
Alfvénic fluctuations, measured quite accurately (1.67 ± 0.03
in Celnikier et al. 1987). Interestingly, the higher-order
structure function exponents measured for the magnetic-field
30 These techniques originate from the theory of MHD turbulence as a superposition of a 2D turbulence and an admixture of Alfvén waves (Fyfe et al.
1977; Montgomery & Turner 1981). As we discussed in § 1.2, we consider
the Goldreich & Sridhar (1995, 1997) view of a critically balanced Alfvénic
cascade to be better physically justified.
31 Note, however, that appreciably flatter and as yet unexplained density
and field-strength spectra at inertial-range scales have been seen in some fastwind measurements made by the Ulysses spacecraft (K. Issautier, O. Alexandrova 2007, private communication).

38

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

strength show that it is a more intermittent quantity than the
velocity of the vector magnetic field (i.e., than the Alfvénic
fluctuations) and that the scaling exponents are quantitatively
very close to the values found for passive scalars in neutral
fluids (Bershadskii & Sreenivasan 2004; Bruno et al. 2007).
One might argue that this constitutes an indirect confirmation of the passive nature of the magnetic-field-strength
fluctuations.
Considering that in the collisionless regime these fluctuations are supposed to be subject to strong kinetic damping
(§ 6.2), the presence of well-developed Kolmogorov-like and
apparently undamped turbulent spectra should be more surprising than has perhaps been acknowledged. A discussion
of this issue was given in § 6.3. Without the inclusion of the
dissipation effects associated with the finite ion gyroscale, the
passive cascade of the density and field strength is purely perpendicular to the (exact) local magnetic field and does not
lead to any scale refinement along the field. This implies
highly anisotropic field-aligned structures, whose length is
determined by the initial conditions (i.e., conditions in the
corona). The kinetic damping is inefficient for such fluctuations. While this would seem to explain the presence of fullyfledged power-law spectra, it is not entirely obvious that the
parallel cascade is really absent once dissipation is taken into
account (Lithwick & Goldreich 2001), so the issue is not yet
settled. This said, we note that there is plenty of evidence of
a high degree of anisotropy and field alignment of the density microstructure in the inner solar wind and outer corona
(e.g., Armstrong et al. 1990; Grall et al. 1997; Woo & Habbal
1997). There is also evidence that the local structure of the
compressive fluctuations at 1 AU is correlated with the coronal activity, implying some form of memory of initial conditions (Kiyani et al. 2007; Hnat et al. 2007; Wicks et al. 2007).
Further discusion and suggestions for an observational study
that could resolve this issue are outlined at the end of § 6.3.
8.1.4. Dissipation at the Ion Gyroscale

At scales of the order of the ion gyroscale, some of the energy arruving in the form of Alfvénic and compressive fluctuations can be transferred into ion heat (via the entropy cascade; see §§ 7.5-7.7), while the rest goes into kinetic Alfvén
waves (§ 8.1.5). The conversion into ion heat occurs via the
Landau damping of the Alfvínic fluctuations, which at k⊥ ρi ∼
1 are no longer decoupled from the density and magneticfield-strength fluctuations (the gyrokinetic limit of this collisionless damping with finite k⊥ ρi is calculated in Howes et al.
2006). We might argue that it is the inflow of energy from the
Alfvénic cascade that accounts for a pronounced local flattening of the spectrum of density fluctuations in the solar wind
observed just above the ion gyroscale (Woo & Armstrong
1979; Celnikier et al. 1983, 1987; Coles & Harmon 1989;
Marsch & Tu 1990b; Coles et al. 1991; Kellogg & Horbury
2005).32
This view of what happens at the ion gyroscale is predicated
on on the assumption of anisotropy of fluctuations, implying
that the Alfvén frequency is much smaller than the cyclotron
frequency even for k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 [see Eq. (45)] and so it is not
cyclotron damping that dissipates the cascade. No definitive
observational study of the solar wind exists as yet showing
32 Celnikier et al. (1987) proposed that the flattening might be a k−1 spectrum analogous to Batchelor's spectrum of passive scalar variance in the
viscous-convective range. We think this explanation is incorrect because density is not passive at or below the ion gyroscale.

that the anisotropy that forms the basis of the gyrokinetic approximation is indeed present at and around the ion gyroscale
(in contrast to the inertial range, where it is fairly certain).
While one cannot, therefore, claim that observations tell us
that ω ≪ Ωi at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1, it has been argued that observations
do not appear to be consistent with cyclotron damping being
the main mechanism for the dissipation of the inertial-range
Alfvénic turbulence at the ion gyroscale (Leamon et al. 1998;
Smith et al. 2001).
Other dissipation mechanisms of the Alfvénic cascade
have
√ been proposed that identify the ion inertial scale, di =
ρi / βi , rather than the ion gyroscale ρi as the scale at
which the Alfvénic cascade is interrupted-these are mostly
based on the Hall MHD description of the plasma fluctuations in the dissipation range (e.g., Gosh et al. 1996;
Leamon et al. 2000; Krishan & Mahajan 2004; Gogoberidze
2005; Galtier & Buchlin 2007; Alexandrova et al. 2008). The
distinction between di and ρi becomes noticeable when βi ≪
1, so di ≫ ρi , a relatively rare occurence in the solar wind.
While some attempts to determine at which of these two
scales a spectral break between the inertial and dissipation
ranges occurs have produced claims that di is a more likely
candidate (Smith et al. 2001), comprehensive studies of numerous available data sets conclude basically that it is hard to
tell (Markovskii et al. 2008). In the gyrokinetic approach advocated in this paper, the ion inertial scale does not play a special role. Considering the scales k⊥ di ∼ 1 in the limit
√ βi ≪ 1,
we can expand the gyrokinetics in k⊥ ρi = k⊥ di βi ≪ 1 in
a way very similar to how it was done in § 5 and obtain precisely the same results: Alfvénic fluctuations described by the
RMHD equations and compressive fluctuations passively advected by them and satisfying the reduced kinetic equation
derived in § 5.5. There is no change in this behavior until
k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 is reached (see Fig. 7 for an illustration of this statement for the linear theory: for the three cases plotted there,
k⊥ di = 1 corresponds to k⊥ ρi = 0.1, 1 and 10 for βi = 0.01, 1
and 100, repectively, but there is nor trace of the inertial scale
in the solutions of the linear dispersion relation). The only
parameter regime in which di does appear as a special scale
is Ti ≪ Te ("cold ions"), when the Hall MHD approximation
can be derived in a systematic way-and even then only if
high electron beta is also assumed (Appendix E). This, however, is not the right limit for the solar wind or most other
astrophysical plasmas of interest.
8.1.5. Fluctuations in the Dissipation Range

If not all of the energy is dissipated at the ion gyroscale
(into ion heat), a kinetic-Alfvén-wave cascade (§§ 7.1-7.4)
is possible below this scale-in what is known as "the dissipation range" in the space-physics literature (a somewhat
confusing term because, as we have seen in § 7, both dissipation and turbulent cascades take place in this range). The
cascade is damped at the electron gyroscale via the electron
Landau damping and converted into electron heat (the expression for the damping rate in the gyrokinetic limit is given in
Howes et al. 2006).
KAW have, indeed, been detected in space plasmas (e.g.,
Coroniti et al. 1982; Grison et al. 2005). For the solar wind,
the spectra of electric and magnetic fluctuations below the
ion gyroscale reported by Bale et al. (2005) are consistent
with k−1/3 and k−7/3 -a result that gives some observational
backing to the theoretical predictions based on assuming an
anisotropic critically balanced KAW cascade (§ 7.4; see Fig. 1
for theoretical scaling fits superimposed on a plot taken from

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
Bale et al. 2005; note, however, that Bale et al. 2005 themselves interpreted their data in a somewhat different way and
that their resolution was in any case not sufficient to be sure of
the scalings). Magnetic-fluctuation spectra recently reported
by Alexandrova et al. (2008) are only slightly steeper than the
theoretical k−7/3 KAW spectrum. These authors also find a
significant amount of magnetic-field-strength fluctuations in
the dissipation range, with a spectrum that follows the same
scaling-this is again consistent with the theoretical picture
of KAW turbulence [see Eq. (203)]. The anisotropy of the
fluctuations below the ion gyroscale was to some extent corroborated by Leamon et al. (1998), who, however, reported
steeper magnetic-fluctuation spectra (with spectral exponent
≃ −4), although they too thought they were seeing KAW (see
also a more recent study by Hamilton et al. 2008).
Analysis of many different measurements of the magneticfluctuation spectra in the dissipation range of the solar wind
reveals a wide spread in the spectral indices (roughly between
−1 and −4; see Smith et al. 2006). There is evidence of a
weak positive correlation between steeper dissipation-range
spectra and higher ion temperatures (Leamon et al. 1998) or
higher dissipation rates calculated from the inertial range
(Smith et al. 2006). This suggests that a larger amount of ion
heating corresponds to a fully or partially suppressed KAW
cascade, which is in line with our view of the ion heating
and the KAW cascade as the two competing channels of the
overall kinetic cascade (§ 7.5). With a weakened KAW cascade, all or part of the dissipation range is dominated by
the ion entropy cascade-a purely kinetic phenomenon manifested by predominantly electrostatic fluctuations and very
steep magnetic-energy spectra (§ 7.7). This might account
both for the steepness of the observed spectra and for the
spread in their indices (§ 7.7.5), although many other theories
exist (see footnote 28).
It is fair to admit, however, that there is currently no satisfactory quantitative or even qualitative theory that would
allow us to predict when the KAW cascade is present and
when it is not or what dissipation-range spectrum should be
expected for given values of the solar-wind parameters (βi ,
Ti /Te , etc.). Resolution both of this issue and of the related
question of which fraction of the turbulent power injected at
the outer scale ends up in the ion vs. the electron heat requires
careful numerical modeling-the minimal model appropriate
for such simulations is the system of equations for isothermal
electrons and gyrokinetic ions derived in § 4.
The density spectra measured by Celnikier et al. (1983,
1987) steepen below the ion gyroscale following the flattened
segment around k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 discussed in § 8.1.4. For a KAW
cascade, the density spectrum should be k−7/3 (§ 7.4); without KAW, k−10/3 (§ 7.7.2). The observed slope appears to be
somewhat shallower even than k−2 , but, given imperfect resolution, neither seriously in contradiction with the prediction
based on the KAW cascade, nor sufficient to corroborate it.
Unfortunately, we could not find published simultaneous measurements of density- and magnetic-fluctuation spectra-such
measurements would provide a better description of the dissipation range and a possibly a way to distinguish between
various theories.
Finally, a caveat is in order that a properly asymptotic behavior in the dissipation range is probably impossible in nature because the scale separation between the ion and electron
gyroscales is only about (mi /me )1/2 ≃ 43 [Eq. (44)]. We refer
the reader to Howes et al. (2008a) for a discussion of how this

39

lack of asymptoticity, namely the fact that the kinetic damping is not always negligibly small throughout the dissipation
range,33, could affect the observed spectra.
8.1.6. Is the Equilibrium Distribution Isotropic and Maxwellian?

Throughout this paper, we have emphasized that we consider weakly collisional plasmas. The collision frequency was
ordered √
similar to the fluctuation frequency and, therefore,
kk λmfpi / βi ∼ 1 [Eq. (48)]. This degree of collisionality is
sufficient to prove that an isotropic Maxwellian equilibrium
distribution F0s (v) does indeed emerge in the lowest order of
the gyrokinetic expansion (Howes et al. 2006).
This argument works well for plasmas such as the ISM,
where collisions are weak (λmfpi ≫ ρi ) but nonnegligible
(λmfpi ≪ L). In space plasmas, the mean free path is of the the
order of 1 AU-the distance between the Sun and the Earth
(see Table 1). Strictly speaking, in so highly collisionless a
plasma, the equilibrium distribution does not have to be either
Maxwellian or isotropic.
The conservation of the first adiabatic invariant, μ =
v2⊥ /2B, suggests that temperature anisotropies with respect
to the magnetic-field direction (T0⊥ 6= T0k ) may exist. These
anisotropies give rise to several very fast growing plasma instabilities: most prominently the firehose (T0⊥ < T0k , in the
solar wind) and mirror (T0⊥ > T0k , in the magnetosheath)
modes (e.g., Gary et al. 1976). Their growth rates peak
around the ion gyroscale, giving rise to small-scale fluctuations at this scale and possibly an energy cascade below it.
For example, in the magnetosheath, a broad spectrum of mirror structures at and below the ion gyroscale has indeed been
identified by spacecraft measurements (Sahraoui et al. 2006).
Remarkably, these structures are highly anisotropic with kk ≪
k⊥ . They cannot, however, be described by the gyrokinetic theory in its present form because δBk /B0 is very large
(∼ 40%, occasionally reaching unity) and because the particle
trapping effect, which is likely to be essential in the nonlinear physics of the mirror instability (Kivelson & Southwood
1996; Schekochihin et al. 2008a), is ordered out in gyrokinetics.
No definitive analytical theory of such fluctuations has been
proposed, although there does exist a vast space-physics literature on the subject, which will not be reviewed here. It
appears to be a plausible assumption that the fluctuations resulting from temperature anisotropies will scatter particles
and limit the anisotropy. This idea has some support in
solar-wind observations: the core particle distribution is only
moderately anisotropic and consistent with a marginal state
with respect to the instability conditions (Gary et al. 2001;
Kasper et al. 2002; Marsch et al. 2004; Hellinger et al. 2006;
Matteini et al. 2007, see also Kellogg et al. 2006 for measurements of the electric-field fluctuations in the ion-cyclotron
frequency range and estimates of the resulting velocity-space
diffusion-claimed to be sufficient to isotropize the ion distribution). This means that assuming an isotropic Maxwellian
equilibrium distribution [Eq. (52)] might prove to be an acceptable simplification, although this is by no means a guaranteed outcome. Further theoretical work is clearly necessary
on this subject: thus, the gyrokinetic ordering and expansion
may have to be modified and/or carried to higher orders. We
33 E.g., at low β : see Fig. 7. Indeed, for β ≪ 1, the KAW frequency is
i
i
ω ∼ k⊥ ρi kk vA [Eq. (210)]; the electron Landau damping becomes important
√
when ω ∼ kk vthe , or k⊥ ρe ∼ βi ≪ 1, so the KAW cascade, if any, should
be interrupted before the electron gyroscale is reached.

40

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

leave this work for the future.
Besides the anisotropies, the particle distribution functions
in the solar wind (especially the electron one) exhibit nonMaxwellian suprathermal tails (see Maksimovic et al. 2005;
Marsch 2006, and references therein). These contain small
(∼ 5% of the total density) populations of energetic particles.
Both the origin of these particles and their effect on turbulence have to be modelled kinetically. While it is possible
to generalize gyrokinetics to general equilibrium distributions
of this kind and examine the interaction between them and
the turbulent fluctuations, we leave such a theory ouside the
scope of this paper. We note in passing that to the extent that
the theoretical considerations presented above contribute to
our understanding of the ion and electron heating, they constitute the first step towards a self-consistent theory capable
of predicting the properties both of the turbulence and of the
equilibrium distributions.
Thus, much remains to be done to incorporate realistic equilibrium distribution functions into the gyrokinetic description
of the solar wind. In the meanwhile, we believe that the gyrokinetic theory based on a Maxwellian equilibrium distribution as presented in this paper, while idealized and imperfect,
is nevertheless a step forward in the analytical treatment of
the space-plasma turbulence compared to the fluid MHD descriptions that have prevailed thus far.
8.2. Interstellar Medium
While the solar wind is unmatched by other astrophysical
plasmas in the level of detail with which turbulence in it can
be measured, the interstellar medium (ISM) also offers an observer a number of ways of diagnosing plasma turbulence,
which, in the case of ISM, is thought to be primarily excited by supernova explosions (Norman & Ferrara 1996). The
accuracy and resolution of this analysis are due to improve
rapidly thanks to many new observatories, e.g., LOFAR,34
Planck (Ensslin et al. 2006), and, in more distant future, the
SKA (Lazio et al. 2004).
The ISM is a spatially inhomogeneous environment consisting of several phases that have different temperatures, densities and degrees of ionization (Ferrière 2001).35 We will use
the Warm ISM phase (see Table 1) as our fiducial interstellar plasma and discuss briefly what is known about the two
main observationally accessible quantities-the electron density and magnetic fields-and what this information means.
8.2.1. Electron Density Fluctuations

The electron-density fluctuations inferred from the interstellar scintillation measurements appear to have a spectrum
with an exponent ≃ −1.7, consistent with the Kolmogorov
scaling (Armstrong et al. 1981, 1995; Lazio et al. 2004; see,
however, dissenting evidence by Smirnova et al. 2006, who
claim a spectral exponent closer to −1.5). This holds over
about 5 decades of scales: λ ∈ (105 , 1010 ) km. Other observational evidence at larger and smaller scales supports the case
for this presumed inertial range to be extended over as many
as 12 decades: λ ∈ (102 , 1015 ) km, a fine example of scale separation that prompted the impressed astrophysics community
to dub the density scaling "The Great Power Law in the Sky."
The upper cutoff here is consistent with the estimates of the
34

http://www.lofar.org
And, therefore, different degrees of importance of the neutral particles
and the associated ambipolar damping effects-these will not be discussed
here; see Lithwick & Goldreich 2001.
35

supernova scale of order 100 pc-presumably the outer scale
of the turbulence (Norman & Ferrara 1996) and also roughly
the scale height of the galactic disk (which is obviously the
absolute upper limit of validity of any homogeneous model of
the ISM turbulence). The lower cutoff is an estimate for the
inner scale below which the logarithmic slope of the density
spectrum steepens to values around −2 (Spangler & Gwinn
1990).
Higdon (1984) was the first to realize that the electrondensity fluctuations in the ISM could be attributed to a cascade of a passive tracer [the MHD entropy mode, see Eq. (23)]
mixed by the ambient turbulence. This idea was brought to
maturity by Lithwick & Goldreich (2001), who studied the
passive cascades of the slow and entropy modes in the framework of the GS theory (see also Maron & Goldreich 2001).
If the turbulence is assumed anisotropic, as in the GS theory,
the passive nature of the density fluctuations with respect to
the decoupled Alfvén-wave cascade becomes a rigorous result both in MHD (§ 2.4) and, as we showed above, in the
more general gyrokinetic description appropriate for weakly
collisional plasmas (§ 5.5). Anisotropy of the electron-density
fluctuations in the ISM is, indeed, observationally supported
(Wilkinson et al. 1994; Trotter et al. 1998; Rickett et al. 2002;
Dennett-Thorpe & de Bruyn 2003; Heyer et al. 2008, see also
Lazio et al. 2004 for a concise discussion), although detailed
scale-by-scale measurements are not currently possible.
If the underlying Alfvén-wave turbulence in the ISM has
−5/3
a k⊥ spectrum, as predicted by GS, so should the electron density (see § 2.6). As we discussed in § 6.3, the physical nature of the inner scale for the density fluctuations depends on whether they have a cascade in kk and are efficiently damped when kk λmfpi ∼ 1 or fail to develop small
parallel scales and can, therefore, reach k⊥ ρi ∼ 1. The observationally estimated inner scale is consistent with the ion
3
gyroscale, ρi ∼ 10√
km (see Table 1; note that the ion inertial scale di = ρi / βi is similar to ρi at the moderate values of βi characteristic of the ISM-see further discussion
of the (ir)relevance of di in § 8.1.4 and Appendix E). However, since the mean free path in the ISM is not huge (Table 1), it is not possible to distinguish this from the perpen3/2
−1
dicular cutoff k⊥
∼ λmfpi L−1/2 ∼ 500 km implied by the parallel cutoff at kk λmfpi ∼ 1 [see Eq. (200)], as advocated by
Lithwick & Goldreich (2001). Note that the relatively short
mean free path means that much of the scale range spanned by
the Great Power Law in the Sky is, in fact, well described by
the MHD approximation either with adiabatic (§ 2) or isothermal (§ 6.1) electrons.
Below the ion gyroscale, the −2 spectral exponent reported
by Spangler & Gwinn (1990) is measured sufficiently imprecisely to be consistent with the −7/3 expected for the density
fluctuations in the KAW cascade (§ 7.4). However, given the
high degree of uncertainty about what happens in this "dissipation range" even in the much better resolved case of the solar wind (§ 8.1.5), it would probably be wise to reserve judgement until better data is available.
8.2.2. Magnetic Fluctuations

The second main observable type of turbulent fluctuations
in the ISM are the magnetic fluctuations, accessible indirectly
via the measurements of the Faraday rotation of the polarization angle of the pulsar light travelling through the ISM.
The structure function of the rotation measure (RM) should
have the Kolmogorov slope of 2/3 if the magnetic fluctua-

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
tions are due to Alfvénic turbulence described by the GS theory. There is a considerable uncertainty in interpreting the
available data, primarily due to insufficient spatial resolution
(rarely better than a few parsec). Structure function slopes
consistent with 2/3 have been reported (Minter & Spangler
1996), but, depending on where one looks, shallower structure functions that seem to steepen at scales of a few parsec
are also observed (Haverkorn et al. 2004).
A recent study by Haverkorn et al. (2005) detected an interesting trend: the RM structure functions computed for several
regions that lie in the galactic spiral arms are nearly perfectly
flat down to the resolution limit, while in the interarm regions,
they have detectable slopes (although these are mostly shallower that 2/3). Observations of magnetic fields in external
galaxies also reveal a marked difference in the magnetic-field
structure between arms and interarms: the spatially regular
(mean) fields are stronger in the interarms, while in the arms,
the stochastic fields dominate (Beck 2006). This qualitative
difference between the magnetic-field structure in the arms
and interarms has been attributed to smaller effective outer
scale in the arms (∼ 1 pc, compared to ∼ 102 pc in the interams; see Haverkorn et al. 2008) or to the turbulence in the
arms and interarms belonging to the two distinct asymptotic
regimes described in § 1.3: closer to the anisotropic Alfvénic
turbulence with a strong mean field in the interarms and to the
isotropic saturated state of small-scale dynamo in the arms
(Schekochihin et al. 2007).
8.3. Accretion Disks

Accretion of plasma onto a central black hole or neutron
star is responsible for many of the most energetic phenomena
observed in astrophysics (see, e.g., Narayan & Quataert 2005
for a review). It is now believed that a linear instability of differentially rotating plasmas-the magnetorotational instability (MRI)-amplifies magnetic fields and gives rise to MHD
turbulence in astrophysical disks (Balbus & Hawley 1998).
Magnetic stresses due to this turbulence transport angular momentum, allowing plasma to accrete. The MRI converts the
gravitational potential energy of the inflowing plasma into
turbulence at the outer scale that is comparable to the scale
height of the disk. This energy is then cascaded to small
scales and dissipated into heat-powering the radiation that
we see from accretion flows. Fluid MHD simulations show
that the MRI-generated turbulence in disks is subsonic and
has β ∼ 10 − 100. Thus, on scales much smaller than the scale
height of the disk, homogeneous turbulence in the parameter
regimes considered in this paper is a valid idealization and
the kinetic models developed above should represent a step
forward compared to the purely fluid approach.
Turbulence is not yet directly observable in disks, so models of turbulence are mostly used to produce testable predictions of observable properties of disks such as their X-ray and
radio emission. One of the best observed cases is the (presumed) accretion flow onto the black hole coincident with the
radio source Sgr A∗ in the center of our Galaxy (see review
by Quataert 2003).
Depending on the rate of heating and cooling in the inflowing plasma (which in turn depend on accretion rate and other
properties of the system under consideration), there are different models that describe the physical properties of accretion
flows onto a central object. In one class of models, a geometrically thin optically thick accretion disk (Shakura & Sunyaev
1973), the inflowing plasma is cold and dense and well described as an MHD fluid. When applied to Sgr A∗ , these

41

models produce a prediction for its total luminosity that is
several orders of magnitude larger than observed. Another
class of models, which appears to be more consistent with the
observed properties of Sgr A∗ , is called radiatively inefficient
accretion flows (RIAFs; see Rees et al. 1982; Narayan & Yi
1995 and review by Quataert 2003 of the applications and observational constraints in Sgr A∗ ). In these models, the inflowing plasma near the black hole is believed to adopt a twotemperature configuration, with the ions (Ti ∼ 1011 − 1012 K)
hotter than the electrons (Te ∼ 109 − 1011 K).36 The electron
and ion thermodynamics decouple because the densities are
so low that the temperature equalization time ∼ νie−1 is longer
than the time for the plasma to flow into the black hole. Thus,
like the solar wind, RIAFs are macroscopically collisionless
plasmas (see Table 1 for plasma parameters in the Galactic
center; note that these parameters are so extreme that the gyrokinetic description, while probably better than the fluid one,
cannot be expected to be rigorously valid; at the very least, it
needs to be reformulated in a relativistic form). At the high
temperatures appropriate to RIAFs, electrons radiate energy
much more efficiently than the ions (by virtue of their much
smaller mass) and are, therefore, expected to contribute dominantly to the observed emission, while the thermal energy of
the ions is swallowed by the black hole. Since the plasma
is collisionless, the electron heating by turbulence largely determines the thermodynamics of the electrons and thus the
observable properties of RIAFs. The question of which fraction of the turbulent energy goes into ion and which into electron heating is, therefore, crucial for understanding accretion
flows-and the answer to this question depends on the detailed properties of the small-scale kinetic turbulence (e.g.,
Quataert & Gruzinov 1999; Sharma et al. 2007), as well as on
the linear properties of the collisionless MRI (Quataert et al.
2002; Sharma et al. 2003).
Since all of the turbulent power coming down the cascade
must be dissipated into either ion or electron heat, it is really
the amount of ion heating at the ion gyroscale that decides
how much energy is available to heat the electrons at their
(smaller) gyroscale. Again, as in the case of the solar wind
(§ 8.1.4 and § 8.1.5), the transition around the ion gyroscale
from the Alfvénic turbulence at k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 to the KAW turbulence at k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 emerges as a key unsolved problem.
8.4. Galaxy Clusters
Galaxy clusters are the largest plasma objects in the Universe. Like the other examples discussed above, the intracluster plasma is in the weakly collisional regime (see Table 1).
Fluctuations of electron density, temperature and of magnetic
fields are measured in clusters by X-ray and radio observatories, but the resolution is only just enough to claim that a
fairly broad scale range of fluctuations exists (Schuecker et al.
2004; Vogt & Ensslin 2005). No power-law scalings have yet
been established beyond reasonable doubt.
What fundamentally hampers quantitative modeling of turbulence and related effects in clusters is that we do not have
a definite theory of the basic properties of the intracluster
medium: its (effective) viscosity, magnetic diffusivity or thermal conductivity. In a weakly collisional and strongly magnetized plasma, all of these depend on the structure of the
magnetic field (Braginskii 1965), which is shaped by the turbulence. If (or at scales where) a reasonable a priori assump36 It is partly with this application in mind that we carried the general
temperature ratio in our calculations; see footnote 15.

42

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

tion can be made about the field structure, further analytical
progress is possible: thus, the theoretical models presented in
this paper assume that the magnetic field is a sum of a slowly
varying in space "mean field" and small low-frequency perturbations (δB ≪ B0 ).
In fact, since clusters do not have mean fields of any magnitude that could be considered dynamically significant, but
do have stochastic fields, the outer-scale MHD turbulence in
clusters falls into the weak-mean-field category (see § 1.3).
The magnetic field should be highly filamentary, organized
in long folded direction-reversing structures. It is not currently known what determines the reversal scale.37 Observations, while tentatively confirming the existence of very
long filaments (Clarke & Ensslin 2006), suggest that the reversal scale is much larger than the ion gyroscale: thus, the
magnetic-energy spectrum for the Hydra A cluster core reported by Vogt & Ensslin (2005) peaks at around 1 kpc, compared to ρi ∼ 105 km. Below this scale, an Alfvén-wave cascade should exist (as is, indeed, suggested by Vogt & Ensslin's
spectrum being roughly consistent with k−5/3 at scales below
the peak). As these scales are collisionless (λmfpi ∼ 100 pc in
the cores and ∼ 10 kpc in the bulk of the clusters), it is to this
turbulence that the theory developed in this paper should be
applicable.
Another complication exists, similar to that discussed in
§ 8.1.6: pressure anisotropies could give rise to fast plasma
instabilities whose growth rate peaks just above the ion gyroscale. As was pointed out by Schekochihin et al. (2005),
these are, in fact, an inevitable consequence of any largescale fluid motions that change the strength of the magnetic
field. Although a number of interesting and plausible arguments can be made about the way the instabilities might determine the magnetic-field structure (Schekochihin & Cowley
2006; Schekochihin et al. 2008a), it is not currently understood how the small-scale fluctuations resulting from these
instabilities coexist with the Alfvénic cascade.
The uncertainties that result from this imperfect understanding of the nature of the intracluster medium are exemplified by the problem of its thermal conductivity. The magneticfield reversal scale in clusters is certainly not larger than the
electron diffusion scale, (mi /me )1/2 λmfpi , which varies from a
few kpc in the cores to a few hundred kpc in the bulk. Therefore, one would expect that the approximation of isothermal
electron fluid (§ 4) should certainly apply at all scales below
the reversal scale, where δB ≪ B0 presumably holds. Even
this, however, is not definitive. One could imagine the electrons being effectively adiabatic if (or in the regions where)
the plasma instabilities give rise to large fluctuations of the
magnetic field (δB/B0 ∼ 1) at the ion gyroscale reducing the
mean free path to λmfpi ∼ ρi (Schekochihin et al. 2008a). Such
fluctuations cannot be described by the gyrokinetics in its current form.
The current state of the observational evidence does not
allow one to exclude either of these possibilities. Both
isothermal (Fabian et al. 2006; Sanders & Fabian 2006) and
nonisothermal (Markevitch & Vikhlinin 2007) coherent structures that appear to be shocks are observed. Disordered fluctuations of temperature can also be detected, which allows one
to infer an upper limit for the scale at which the isothermal
37 See Schekochihin & Cowley (2006) for a detailed presentation of our
views on the interplay between turbulence, magnetic field and plasma effects in cluster; for further discussions and disagreements, see Ensslin & Vogt
(2006); Subramanian et al. (2006); Brunetti & Lazarian (2007).

approximation can start being valid: thus, Markevitch et al.
(2003) find temperature variations at all scales down to ∼
100 kpc, which is the statistical limit that defines the spatial resolution of their temperature map. In none of these or
similar measurements is the magnetic field data available that
would make possible a pointwise comparison of the magnetic
and thermal structure.
Because of this lack of information about the state of the
magnetized plasma in clusters, theories of the intracluster
medium are not sufficiently constrained by observations, so
no one theory is in a position to prevail. This uncertain state
of affairs might be improved by analyzing the observationally
much better resolved case of the solar wind, which should be
quite similar to the intracluster medium at very small scales
(except for somewhat lower values of βi in the solar wind).
9. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have considered magnetized plasma turbulence in the astrophysically prevalent regime of weak collisionality. We have shown how the energy injected at the outer
scale cascades in phase space, eventually to increase the entropy of the system and heat the particles. In the process, we
have explained how one combines plasma physics tools-in
particular, the gyrokinetic theory-with the ideas of a turbulent cascade to arrive at a hierarchy of tractable models of turbulence in various physically distinct scale intervals. These
models represent the branching pathways of the generalized
energy cascade and make clear the "fluid" and "kinetic" aspects of plasma turbulence.
A detailed outline of these developments was given in the
Introduction. Intermediate technical summaries were provided in § 4.9, § 5.7, and § 7.10. Our view of how the transformation of the large-scale turbulent energy into heat occurs
was encapsulated in the concept of kinetic cascade. It was
previewed in § 1.4 and developed quantitatively in §§ 3.4-3.5,
§ 4.7, § 5.6, and §§ 7.5-7.8. In § 8, we discussed at length the
ways in which all this is useful in understanding turbulence in
real astrophysical plasmas.
Following a series of analytical contributions that set
up the theoretical framework for astrophysical gyrokinetics
(Howes et al. 2006, 2008a; Schekochihin et al. 2007, 2008b,
and this paper), an extensive programme of fluid (T. A. Yousef
et al. 2008, in preparation), mixed fluid-kinetic (T. Tatsuno et al. 2008, in preparation), and fully gyrokinetic38
(Howes et al. 2008b; Tatsuno et al. 2008) numerical simulations of magnetized plasma turbulence is now underway.
Careful comparisons of the fully gyrokinetic simulations
with simulations based on the computable models derived
in this paper (RMHD-§ 2, isothermal electron fluid-§ 4,
KRMHD-§ 5, ERMHD-§ 7) as well as with the numerical studies based on various Landau fluid (Snyder et al. 1997;
Goswami et al. 2005; Ramos 2005; Sharma et al. 2006, 2007;
Passot & Sulem 2007) and gyrofluid (Hammett et al. 1991;
Dorland & Hammett 1993; Snyder & Hammett 2001; Scott
2007) closures appear to be the way forward in developing
a comprehensive numerical model of the turbulent cascade
from the outer scale to the electron gyroscale. The objective is
a quantitative characterization of the scaling-range properties
(spectra, anisotropy, nature of fluctuations and their interactions), the ion and electron heating, and the transport properties of the magnetized plasma turbulence.
Of the many astrophysical plasmas to which these results
apply, the solar wind, due to the high quality of turbulence
measurements possible in it, appears to be best suited for di-

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
rect and detailed quantitative comparisons of the theory and
simulation results with observational evidence.
We thank O. Alexandrova, S. Bale, J. Borovsky, T. Carter,
S. Chapman, C. Chen, E. Churazov, T. Ensslin, A. Fabian,
A. Finoguenov, A. Fletcher, M. Haverkorn, B. Hnat, T. Horbury, K. Issautier, C. Lacombe, M. Markevitch, K. Osman,
T. Passot, A. Petrukovich, F. Sahraoui, A. Shukurov, and
A. Vikhlinin for helpful discussions of experimental and observational data. We also thank I. Abel, M. Barnes, D. Ernst,
J. Hastie, P. Ricci, C. Roach, and B. Rogers for useful interactions concerning collisions in gyrokinetics. The authors'
travel was supported by the US DOE Center for Multiscale
Plasma Dynamics and by the Leverhulme Trust (UK) Inter-

43

national Academic Network for Magnetized Plasma Turbulence. A.A.S. was supported by a PPARC/STFC Advanced
Fellowship and by an RCUK Academic Fellowship. He also
thanks the UCLA Plasma Group fot its hospitality on several
occasions. S.C.C. and W.D. thank the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics and the Aspen Center for Physics for their
hospitality. G.W.H. was supported by the US DOE contract
DE-AC02-76CH03073. G.G.H. and T.T. were supported by
the US DOE Center for Multiscale Plasma Dynamics. E.Q.
and G.G.H. were supported in part by the David and Lucille
Packard Foundation.
38 Using the publicly available GS2 code (developed originally for fusion
applications; see http://gs2.sourceforge.net) and the purpose-built AstroGK
code (see http://astro.berkeley.edu/~ ghowes/astrogk/).

APPENDIX

A. BRAGINSKII'S TWO-FLUID EQUATIONS AND REDUCED MHD

Here we explain how the standard one-fluid MHD equations used in § 2 and the collisional limit of the KRMHD system
(§ 6.1, derived in Appendix D) both emerge as limiting cases of the two-fluid theory. For the case of anisotropic fluctuations,
kk /k⊥ ≪ 1, all of this can, of course, be derived from gyrokinetics, but it is useful to provide a connection to the more well
known fluid description of collisional plasmas.
A.1. Two-Fluid Equations
The rigorous derivation of the fluid equations for a collisional plasma was done in the classic paper of Braginskii (1965). His
equations, valid for ω/νii ≪ 1, kk λmfpi ≪ 1, k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 (see Fig. 3), evolve the densities ns , mean velocities us and temperatures
Ts of each plasma species (s = i, e):


∂
+ us * ∇ ns = −ns∇ * us ,
(A1)
∂t




us × B
∂
+ Fs ,
(A2)
+ us * ∇ us = −∇ps − ∇ * Π̂s + qs ns E +
ms n s
∂t
c


3
∂
ns
+ us * ∇ Ts = −ps ∇ * us − ∇ * Γs − Π̂s : ∇us + Qs,
(A3)
2
∂t

where ps = ns Ts and the expressions for the viscous stress tensor Π̂s , the friction force Fs , the heat flux Γs and the interspecies heat
exchange Qs are given in Braginskii (1965). Equations (A1-A3) are complemented with the quasineutrality condition, ne = Zni ,
and the Faraday and Ampère laws, which are (in the nonrelativistic limit)
∂B
= −c∇ × E,
∂t

j = ene (ui − ue ) =

c
∇ × B.
4π

(A4)

Because of quasineutrality, we only need one of the continuity equations, say the ion one. We can also use the electron momentum
equation [Eq. (A2), s = e] to express E, which we then substitute into the ion momentum equation and the Faraday law. The
resulting system is
dρ
= −ρ∇ * u,
dt




du
B * ∇B Zme
B2
∂
ρ = −∇ p +
− ∇ * Π̂ +
ρ
−
+ ue * ∇ ue ,
dt
8π
4π
mi
∂t
"

 #
∂B
j × B c∇pe c∇ * Π̂e cFe cme ∂
+
+
−
+
=∇× u×B−
+ ue * ∇ ue ,
∂t
ene
ene
ene
ene
e
∂t

(A5)
(A6)
(A7)

where ρ = mi ni , u = ui , p = pi + pe , Π̂ = Π̂i + Π̂e , ue = u − j/ene, ne = Zni , d/dt = ∂/∂t + u * ∇. The ion and electron temperatures
continue to satisfy Eq. (A3).
A.2. Strongly Magnetized Limit

In this form, the two-fluid theory starts resembling the standard one-fluid MHD, which was our starting point in § 2: Eqs. (A5A7) already look similar to the continuity, momentum and induction equations. The additional terms that appear in these equations
and the temperature equations (A3) are brought under control by considering how they depend on a number of dimensionless

44

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

parameters: ω/νii , kk λmfpi , k⊥ ρi , (me /mi )1/2 . While all these are small in Braginskii's calculation, no assumption is made as to
how they compare to each other. We now specify that
r
kk λmfpi
me
ω
, k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi ∼
∼ √
≪1
(A8)
νii
mi
βi
(see Fig. 4). Note that the first of these relations is equivalent to assuming that the fluctuation frequencies are Alfvénic-the same
assumption as in gyrokinetics [Eq. (48)]. The second relation in Eq. (A8) will be referred to by us as the strongly magnetized
limit. Under the assumptions (A8), the two-fluid equations reduce to the following closed set:39
dρ
= −ρ∇ * u,
dt






du
B2 1
B * ∇B
1
1
ρ = −∇ p +
+ ρνki b̂b̂ : ∇u − ∇ * u + ∇ * b̂b̂ρνki b̂b̂ : ∇u − ∇ * u +
,
dt
8π 3
3
3
4π
dB
= B * ∇u − B∇ * u,
dt

2

2
2
1
dTi
1
= − Ti ∇ * u + ∇ * b̂ρκki b̂ * ∇Ti − νie (Ti − Te ) + mi νki b̂b̂ : ∇u − ∇ * u ,
dt
3
ρ
3
3

dTe
2
1
1
= − Te ∇ * u + ∇ * b̂ρκke b̂ * ∇Te − νie (Te − Ti ) ,
dt
3
ρ
Z

(A10)
(A11)
(A12)
(A13)
(A14)

where νki = 0.90vthi λmfpi is the parallel ion viscosity, κki = 2.45vthi λmfpi parallel ion thermal diffusivity, κke = 1.40vthe λmfpe ∼

Z 2 /τ 5/2 (mi /me )1/2 κki parallel electron thermal diffusivity [here λmfpi = vthi /νii with νii defined in Eq. (51)], and νie ion-electron
collision rate [defined in Eq. (50)]. Note that the last term in Eq. (A13) represents the viscous heating of the ions.
A.3. One-Fluid Equations (MHD)

If we now restrict ourselves to the low-frequency regime where ion-electron collisions dominate over all other terms in the
ion-temperature equation (A13),
r
kk λmfpi mi
ω
∼ √
≪1
(A15)
νie
me
βi
[see Eqs. (A8) and (50)], we have, to lowest order in this new subsidiary expansion, Ti = Te = T . We can now write p = (ni + ne )T =
(1 + Z)ρT/mi and, adding Eqs. (A13) and (A14), find the equation for pressure:

2
 2
1
dp 5
(A16)
+ p∇ * u = ∇ * b̂ne κke b̂ * ∇T + mi νki b̂b̂ : ∇u − ∇ * u ,
dt 3
3
3

where we have neglected the ion thermal diffisivity compared to the electron one, but kept the ion heating term to maintain
energy conservation. Equation (A16) together with Eqs. (A10-A12) constitutes the conventional one-fluid MHD system. With
the dissipative terms [which are small because of Eq. (A15)] neglected, this was the starting point for our fluid derivation of
RMHD in § 2.
Note that the electrons in this regime are adiabatic because the electron thermal diffusion is small
p r mi
κke kk2
≪ 1,
(A17)
∼ kk λmfpi βi
ω
me

provided Eq. (A15) holds and βi is order unity. If we take βi ≫ 1 instead, we can still satisfy Eq. (A15), so Ti = Te follows from
the ion temperature equation (A13) and the one-fluid equations emerge as an expansion in high βi . However, these equations now
describe two physical√regimes: the adiabatic long-wavelength
regime that satisfies Eq. (A17) and the shorter-wavelength regime
√
in which (me /mi )1/2 / βi ≪ kk λmfpi ≪ (me /mi )1/2 βi , so the fluid is isothermal, T = T0 = const, p = [(1 + Z)T0 /mi ]ρ = c2s ρ [Eq. (9)
holds with γ = 1].

`
 ́
The structure of the momentum equation (A11) is best understood by realizing that ρνki b̂b̂ : ∇u − ∇ * u/3 = p⊥ − pk , the difference between the perpendicular and parallel (ion) pressures. Since the total pressure is p = (2/3)p⊥ + (1/3)pk , Eq. (A11) can be written
„
«
ˆ `
 ́ ̃ B * ∇B
B2
du
= −∇ p⊥ +
+ ∇ * b̂b̂ p⊥ − pk +
.
(A9)
ρ
dt
8π
4π
39

This is the general form of the momentum equation that is also valid for collisionless plasmas, when k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 but kk λmfpi is order unity or even large.
Equation (A9) together with the continuity equation (A11), the induction equation (A12) and a kinetic equation for the particle distribution function (from the
solution of which p⊥ and pk are determined) form the system known as Kinetic MHD (KMHD, see Kulsrud 1964, 1983). The collisional limit, kk λmfpi ≪ 1, of
KMHD is again Eqs. (A10-A14).

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

45

A.4. Two-Fluid Equations with Isothermal Electrons
Let us now consider the regime in which the coupling between the ion and electron temperatures is small and the electron
diffusion is large [the limit opposite to Eqs. (A15) and (A17)]:
r
p r mi
κke kk2
kk λmfpi mi
ω
∼ √
≫ 1,
≫ 1,
(A18)
∼ kk λmfpi βi
νie
me
ω
me
βi

Then the electrons are isothermal, Te = T0e = const (with the usual assumption of stochastic field lines, so b̂ * ∇Te = 0 implies
∇Te = 0, as in § 4.4), while the ion temperature satisfies

2
 2
dTi
2
1
1
= − Ti ∇ * u + ∇ * b̂ρκki b̂ * ∇Ti + mi νki b̂b̂ : ∇u − ∇ * u .
(A19)
dt
3
ρ
3
3

Equation (A19) together with Eqs. (A10-A12) and p = ρ(Ti + ZT0e )/mi are a closed system that describes an MHD-like fluid
of adiabatic ions and isothermal electrons. Applying the ordering of § 2.1 to these equations and carrying out an expansion in
kk /k⊥ ≪ 1 entirely analogously to the way it was done in § 2, we arrive at the RMHD equations (17-18) for the Alfvén waves
and the following system for the compressive fluctuations (slow and entropy modes):


d δρ δBk
+ b̂ * ∇uk = 0,
(A20)
−
dt ρ0 B0


duk 2
δBk
1 d δρ
,
(A21)
= νki b̂ * ∇ b̂ * ∇uk +
− vA b̂ * ∇
dt
B0
3 dt ρ0


δTi
d δTi 2 d δρ
,
(A22)
−
= κki b̂ * ∇ b̂ * ∇
dt T0i 3 dt ρ0
T0i
and the pressure balance





δTi 2 δBk
1
Z δρ
1 d δρ
.
=−
−
+ 2 νki b̂ * ∇uk +
1+
τ ρ0
T0i βi B0 3vA
3 dt ρ0

(A23)

Recall that these equations, being the consequence of Braginskii's two-fluid equations (§ A.1), are an expansion in kk λmfpi ≪ 1
correct up to first order in this small parameter. Since the dissipative terms are small, we can replace (d/dt)δρ/ρ0 in the viscous
terms of Eqs. (A21) and (A23) by its value computed from Eqs. (A20), (A22) and (A23) in neglect of dissipation: (d/dt)δρ/ρ0 =
−b̂ * ∇uk /(1 + c2s /v2A ) [cf. Eq. (25)], where the speed of sound cs is defined by Eq. (163). Substituting this into Eqs. (A21)
and (A23), we recover the collisional limit of KRMHD derived in Appendix D, see Eqs. (D18-D20) and (D22).
B. COLLISIONS IN GYROKINETICS

The general collision operator that appears in Eq. (36) is (Landau 1936)


 


X q2 q2′ ∂ Z
ww
∂ fs (v) 1
1
∂ fs′ (v′ )
1
∂ fs
s s
,
= 2π ln Λ
Î − 2 *
fs′ (v′ )
fs (v)
* d 3 v′
−
∂t c
ms ∂v
w
w
ms
∂v
ms ′
∂v′
′

(B1)

s

where w = v − v′ and ln Λ is the Coulomb logarithm. We now take into account the expansion of the distribution function (52),
use the fact that the collision operator vanishes when it acts on a Maxwellian, and retain only first-order terms in the gyrokinetic
expansion. This gives us the general form of the collision term in Eq. (55): it is the ring-averaged linearized form of the Landau
collision operator (B1), (∂hs/∂t)c = hCs [h]iRs , where



 ′

 

X q2 q2′ ∂ Z
ww
v
v
1 ∂
1 ∂
1
s s
′
′
hs (v) − F0s(v)
(v
)
. (B2)
h
Î − 2 * F0s′ (v′ )
+
+
* d 3 v′
Cs [h] = 2π ln Λ
s
ms ∂v
w
w
T0s′ ms ∂v
T0s ms′ ∂v′
′
s

Note that the velocity derivatives are taken at constant r, i.e., the gyrocenter distribution functions that appear in the integrand
should be understood as hs (v) ≡ hs (t, r + v⊥ × ẑ/Ωs , v⊥ , vk ). The explicit form of the gyrokinetic collision operator can be derived
in k space as follows:
#+

 * "X
X
X




∂hs
ik*R
(B3)
eik*Rs eik*ρs (v)Cs e−ik*ρ hk ,
eik*rCs e−ik*ρ hk Rs =
=
e hk
= Cs
∂t c
k
k
k
Rs

where ρs (v) = −v⊥ × ẑ/Ωs and Rs = r − ρs (v). Angle brackets with no subscript refer to averages over the gyroangle θ of quantities
that do not depend on spatial coordinates. Note that inside the operator Cs [. . .], h occurs both with index s and velocity v and
with index s′ and velocity v′ (over which summation/integration is done). In the latter case, ρ = ρs′ (v′ ) = −v′⊥ × ẑ/Ωs′ in the
exponential factor inside the operator.
Most of the properties of the collision operator that are used in the main body of this paper to order the collision terms
can be established in general, already on the basis of Eq. (B3) (§§ B.1-B.2). If the explicit form of the collision operator is

46

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

required, we could, in principle, perform the ring average on the linearized operator C [Eq. (B2)] and derive an explicit form of
(∂hs/∂t)c . In practice, in gyrokinetics, as in the rest of plasma physics, the full collision operator is only used when it is absolutely
unavoidable. In most problems of interest, further simplifications are possible: the same-species collisions are often modeled by
simpler operators that share the full collision operator's conservation properties (§ B.3), while the interspecies collision operators
are expanded in the electron-ion mass ratio (§ B.4).
B.1. Velocity-Space Integral of the Gyrokinetic Collision Operator

Many of our calculations involve integrating the gyrokinetic equation (55) over the velocity space while keeping r constant.
Here we estimate the size of the integral of the collision term when k⊥ ρs ≪ 1. Using Eq. (B3),
  XZ

Z


∂hs
=
d 3 v eik*r−ik*ρs (v) eik*ρs (v)Cs e−ik*ρ hk
d3v
∂t c r k
Z ∞
Z +∞
X


eik*r 2π
dv⊥ v⊥
dvk e−ik*ρs (v) eik*ρs (v)Cs e−ik*ρ hk
=
=

e

ik*r

k

=

X

−∞

0

k

X

eik*r

k

Z

d v e

Z

v⊥ × ẑ 1
d 3 v 1 − ik *
−
Ωs
2

3

"

−ik*ρs (v)

e

ik*ρs (v)



Cs e

−ik*ρ



hk =

X
k

e

ik*r

Z



d 3 v J0 (as ) eik*ρs (v)Cs e−ik*ρ hk

#


2
2


v⊥ × ẑ
1 k⊥ v⊥
k*
−
+ . . . Cs e−ik*ρ hk .
Ωs
4
Ωs

(B4)

Since the (linearized) collision operator Cs conserves particle number, the first term in the expansion vanishes. The operator
Cs = Css +Css′ is a sum of the same-species collision operator [the s′ = s part of the sum in Eq. (B2)] and the interspecies collision
operator (the s′ 6= s part). The former conserves total momentum of the particles of species s, so it gives no cotribution to the
second term in the expansion in Eq. (B4). Therefore,
Z
2 2
ρs δns .
(B5)
d 3 v hhCss [hs ]iRs ir ∼ νss k⊥
The interspecies collisions do contribute to the second term in Eq. (B4) due to momentum exchange with the species s′ . This
contribution is readily inferred from the standard formula for the linearized friction force (see, e.g., Helander & Sigmar 2002):
Z
Z
i
h
 −ik*ρ 
′
′
3
(B6)
ms d v vCss′ e
hk = − d 3 v v ms νSss (v)e−ik*ρs (v) hsk + ms′ νSs s (v)e−ik*ρs′ (v) hs′ k ,
√







′
v
v
ms
v
2πn0s′ q2s q2s′ ln Λ  vths 3
erf ′
1+
erf
−
,
(B7)
νSss (v) =
1/2 3/2
′
′
′
v
ms
vths
vths
vths′
ms T0s
√ Rx
where erf (x) = (2/ π) 0 dy exp(−y2 ) is the error function. From this, via a calculation of ring averages analogous to Eq. (B16),
we get



Z
Z
E
E 
D


′
v⊥ × ẑ
ms ′ Ωs ′ s ′ s D
d 3 v −ik *
Css′ e−ik*ρ hk = − d 3 v νSss (v) ik * ρs (v) e−ik*ρs (v) hsk +
νS (v) ik * ρs′ (v) e−ik*ρs′ (v) hs′ k
Ωs
ms Ωs


Z
′
′
′
q
s
2 2
2 2
ρs δns + νs′ s k⊥
ρs′ δns′ . (B8)
νSs s (v)as′ J1 (as′ )hs′ k ∼ νss′ k⊥
= − d 3 v νSss (v)asJ1 (as )hsk +
qs

2 2
For the ion-electron collisions (s = i, s′ = e), using Eqs. (44) and (50), we find that both terms are ∼ (me /mi )1/2 νii k⊥
ρi δni .
2 2
Thus, besides an extra factor of k⊥ ρi , the ion-electron collisions are also subdominant by one order in the mass-ratio expansion
compared to the ion-ion collisions. The same estimate holds for the interspecies contributions to the third and fourth terms in
2 2
Eq. (B4). In a similar fashion, the integral of the electron-ion collision operator (s = e, s′ = i), is ∼ νei k⊥
ρe δne , which is the same
order as the integral of the electron-electron collisions.
The conclusion of this section is that, both for ion and for electron collisions, the velocity-space integral (at constant r) of the
gyrokinetic collision operator is higher order than the collision operator itself by two orders of k⊥ ρs . This is the property that we
relied on in neglecting collision terms in Eqs. (101) and (134).

B.2. Ordering of Collision Terms in Eqs. (122) and (134)

In § 5, we claimed that the contribution to the ion-ion collision term due to the (ZehφiRi /T0i )F0i part of the ion distribution
function [Eq. (121)] was one order of k⊥ ρi smaller than the contributions from the rest of hi . This was used to order collision
terms in Eqs. (122) and (134). Indeed, from Eq. (B3),

 
X
 Zeφk

ZehφiRi
=
eik*Ri eik*ρi Cii e−ik*ρi J0 (ai )F0i
F0i
Cii
T0i
T0i
Ri
k


 
2
X
1
Zeφk
2 ai
ik*ρi
2 2 Zeφ
ik*Ri
=
e Cii 1 − ik * ρi − (k * ρi ) − + * * * F0i
∼ νii k⊥
ρi
F0i .
(B9)
e
2
4
T0i
T0i
k

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

47

This estimate holds because, as it is easy to ascertain using Eq. (B2), the operator Cii annihilates the first two terms in the
expansion and only acts nontrivially on an expression that is second order in k⊥ ρi . With the aid of Eq. (46), the desired ordering
of the term (B9) in Eq. (122) follows. When Eq. (B9) is integrated over velocity space, the result picks up two extra orders in k⊥ ρi
[a general effect of velocity-space integration; see Eq. (B4)], so the resulting term in Eq. (134) is third order, as stated in § 5.3.
B.3. Model Pitch-Angle-Scattering Operator for Same-Species Collisions
A popular model operator for same-species collisions that conserves particle number, momentum, and energy is constructed
by taking the test-particle pitch-angle-scattering operator and correcting it with an additional term that ensures momentum conservation (Rosenbluth et al. 1972; see also Helander & Sigmar 2002):
R 3


 

d v v νDss (v) hs
3
2v * U[hs]
1 ∂ 2 hs
1 ∂
ss
2 ∂hs
F0s , U[hs ] = R 3
,
(B10)
+
CM [hs ] = νD (v)
1−ξ
+
2
2
2
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ 1 − ξ ∂θ
2 d v (v/vths )2 νDss (v)F0s(v)
vths
√


 v 3  1 v2   v  1 v
2πn0s q4s ln Λ
v
ths
ths
′
ss
ths
νD (v) = νss
erf
1−
erf
+
,
ν
=
,
(B11)
ss
1/2 3/2
v
2 v2
vths
2 v
vths
ms T
0s

where the velocity derivatives are at constant r. The gyrokinetic version of this operator is (cf. Catto & Tsang 1977;
Dimits & Cohen 1994)


X
 ∂hsk v2 (1 + ξ 2) 2 2
v⊥ J1 (as )U⊥ [hsk ] + vk J0 (as )Uk [hsk ]
1 ∂
1 − ξ2
−
k
ρ
h
+
2
F
eik*Rs νDss (v)
hCM [hs ]iRs =
0s , (B12)
⊥ s sk
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ
4v2ths
v2ths
k
R
R
3 d 3 v vk J0 (as ) νDss (v)hsk(v⊥ , vk )
3 d 3 v v⊥ J1 (as ) νDss (v)hsk (v⊥ , vk )
R
R
, Uk [hsk ] =
,
U⊥ [hsk ] =
2
2
d 3 v (v/vths )2 νDss (v)F0s (v)
d 3 v (v/vths )2 νDss (v)F0s (v)

where as = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωs . The velocity derivatives are now at constant Rs . The spatial diffusion term appearing in the ring-averaged
collision operator is physically due to the fact that a change in a particle's velocity resulting from a collision can lead to a change
in the spatial position of its gyrocenter.
 p

p
In order to derive Eq. (B12), we use Eq. (B3). Since, ρs (v) = −x̂v 1 − ξ 2 sin θ + ŷv 1 − ξ 2 cos θ /Ωs , it is not hard to see
that
"
#


∂
∂ −ik*ρs (v)
∂ ik⊥ * v⊥
ξ ik⊥ * v⊥ × ẑ
∂ −ik*ρs (v)
−ik*ρs (v)
−ik*ρ(v)
h
,
hsk .
(B13)
e
hsk = e
−
e
h
=
e
+
sk
sk
∂ξ
∂ξ 1 − ξ 2
Ωs
∂θ
∂θ
Ωs

Therefore,


 ∂ −ik*ρs (v)
 ∂hsk v2 ξ 2 2
∂
∂
eik*ρs (v)
1 − ξ2
1 − ξ2
k hsk ,
e
hsk =
−
∂ξ
∂ξ
∂ξ
∂ξ
2Ω2s ⊥




2
v2 1 − ξ 2 2
ik*ρs (v) ∂
−ik*ρs (v)
e
e
hsk = −
k⊥ hsk .
∂θ2
2Ω2s
(B14)
Combining these formulae, we obtain the first two terms in Eq. (B12). Now let us work out the U term:
 D

Z ∞
Z +∞
Z
E
E
D


′
′ ′
ik*ρs (v)
′
′
ik*ρs (v)
3 ′ ′ ss ′ −ik*ρs (v′ )
* 2π
dv⊥ v⊥
dv′k νDss (v′ ) v′ e−ik*ρs (v ) hsk v′⊥ , v′k .
e
v * d v v νD (v )e
hsk v⊥ , vk = v e
0

−∞

(B15)
Since v e±ik*ρs (v) = ẑvk e±ik*ρs (v) + v⊥ e±ik*ρs (v) , where e±ik*ρs (v) = J0 (as ) and







v⊥ × ẑ
∂
v⊥ × ẑ
ẑ × k⊥
±ik*ρs (v)
= ẑ × v⊥ × ẑ exp ∓ik⊥ *
v⊥ e
= ±iΩs ẑ ×
exp ∓ik⊥ *
= ±i
v⊥ J1 (as ), (B16)
Ωs
∂k⊥
Ωs
k⊥
we obtain the third term in Eq. (B12).
It is useful to give the lowest-order form of the operator (B12) in the limit k⊥ ρs ≪ 1:
#
"
R
3vk d 3 v′ v′k νDss (v′ )hs(v′⊥ , v′k )

1 ∂
2 2
2 ∂hs
ss
R
ρs ).
F0s + O(k⊥
1−ξ
hCM [hs ]iRs = νD (v)
+
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ
d 3 v′ v′2 νDss (v′ )F0s (v′ )

(B17)

This is the operator that can be used in the right-hand side of Eq. (142) (as, e.g., is done in the calculation of collisional transport
terms in Appendix D.3).
In practical numerical computations of gyrokinetic turbulence, the pitch-angle scattering operator is not sufficient because
the distribution function develops small scales not only in ξ but also in v (M. A. Barnes, W. Dorland and T. Tatsuno 2006,
unpublished). This is, indeed, expected because the phase-space entropy cascade produces small scales in v⊥ , rather than just
in ξ (see § 7.6.1). In order to provide a cut off in v, an energy-diffusion operator must be added to the pitch-angle-scattering

48

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

operator derived above. A numerically tractable model gyrokinetic energy-diffusion operator was proposed by Abel et al. (2008);
Barnes et al. (2008).40
B.4. Electron-Ion Collision Operator

This operator can be expanded in me /mi and to the lowest order is (see, e.g., Helander & Sigmar 2002)

 

 v 3
 ∂he
2v * ui
1 ∂
1 ∂ 2 he
the
ei
,
ν
(v)
=
ν
F
Cei [h] = νDei (v)
+
1 − ξ2
.
+
ei
0e
D
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ 1 − ξ 2 ∂θ2
v
v2the

(B18)

The corrections to this form are O(me /mi ). This is second order in the expansion of § 4 and, therefore, we need not keep these
corrections. The operator (B18) is mathematically similar to the model operator for the same-species collisions [Eq. (B12)]. The
gyrokinetic version of this operator is derived in the way analogous to the calculation in Appendix B.3. The result is

X
 ∂hek v2 (1 + ξ 2) 2 2
1 ∂
1 − ξ2
−
eik*Re νDei (v)
hCei [h]iRe =
k⊥ ρe hek
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ
4v2the
k

Z
′2
′
2vk J0 (ae )ukki
Zme v2⊥ J1 (ae )
2 2 1
3 ′ 2v⊥ J1 (ai )
F
k
ρ
h
+
d
v
(B19)
−
F
0e ⊥ i
ik
0e .
mi v2the ae
n0i
v2thi a′i
v2the
The second and third terms are manifestly second order in (me /mi )1/2 , so have to be neglected along with other O(me /mi )
contributions to the electron-ion collisions. The remaining two terms are first order in the mass-ratio expansion: the first term
vanishes for he = h(0)
e [Eq. (98)], so its contribution is first order; in the fourth term, we can use Eq. (85) to express uki in terms of
quantities that are also first order. Keeping only the first-order terms, the gyrokinetic electron-ion collision operator is


 (1) 2vk uki
1 ∂
2 ∂he
ei
1−ξ
+ 2 F0e .
(B20)
hCei [h]iRe = νD (v)
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ
vthe
Note that the last term gives rise to ion-electron friction and, therefore, to resistivity.

C. A HEURISTIC DERIVATION OF THE ELECTRON EQUATIONS

Here we show how the equations (113-114) of § 4 and the ERMHD equations (206-207) of § 7 can be derived heuristically
from electron fluid dynamics and a number of physical assumptions, without the use of gyrokinetics (§ C.1). This derivation is
not rigorous. Its role is to provide an intuitive route to the isothermal electron fluid and ERMHD approximations.
C.1. Derivation of Eqs. (113-114)

We start with the following three equations:
∂B
= −c∇ × E,
∂t

∂ne
+ ∇ * (ne ue ) = 0,
∂t

E+

ue × B
∇pe
.
=−
c
ene

(C1)

These are Faraday's law, the electron continuity equation, and the generalized Ohm's law, which is the electron momentum
equation with all electron inertia terms neglected (i.e., effectively, the lowest order in the expansion in the electron mass me ). The
electron pressure is assumed to be scalar by fiat (this can be justified in certain limits: for example in the collisional limit, as in
Appendix A, or for the isothermal electron fluid approximation derived in § 4). The electron-pressure term in the right-hand of
Ohm's law is sometimes called the thermoelectric term. We now assume the same static uniform equilibrium, E0 = 0, B0 = B0 ẑ,
that we have used throughout this paper and apply to Eqs. (C1) the fundamental ordering discussed in § 3.1.
First consider the projection of Ohm's law onto the total magnetic field B, use the definition of E [Eq. (37)], and keep the
leading-order terms in the ǫ expansion:
E * b̂ = −

1
b̂ * ∇pe
ene

⇒

δ pe
1 ∂Ak
.
+ b̂ * ∇φ = b̂ * ∇
c ∂t
en0e

(C2)

This turns into Eq. (113) if we also assume isothermal electrons, δ pe = T0e δne [see Eq. (100)].
With the aid of Ohm's law, Faraday's law turns into
∂B
= ∇ × (ue × B) = −ue * ∇B + B * ∇ue − B∇ * ue .
∂t
Keeping the leading-order terms, we find, for the components of Eq. (C3) perpendicular and parallel to the mean field,





δBk δne
δB⊥
∂
∂
= b̂ * ∇uke .
= b̂ * ∇u⊥e ,
−
+ u⊥e * ∇⊥
+ u⊥e * ∇⊥
∂t
B0
∂t
B0 n0e

(C3)

(C4)

40 The collision operator now used the GS2 and AstroGK codes (see footnote 38) is their energy-diffusion operator plus the pitch-angle-scattering operator (B12).

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
In the last equation, we have used the electron continuity equation to write


δne
∂
.
+ u⊥e * ∇⊥
∇ * ue = −
∂t
n0e

49

(C5)

From Ohm's law, we have, to lowest order,
u⊥e = −ẑ ×

c
B0





δ pe
c
δ pe
E⊥ + ∇⊥
= ẑ × ∇⊥
φ−
.
en0e
B0
en0e

Using this expression in the second of the equations (C4) gives






d δBk δne
c
c δ pe δne
δ pe δBk
− b̂ * ∇uke =
−
,
−
,
,
dt B0 n0e
B0 en0e B0
B0 en0e n0e

(C6)

(C7)

where d/dt is defined in the usual way [Eq. (119)]. Assuming isothermal electrons (δ pe = T0e δne ) annihilates the second term on
the right-hand side and turns the above equation into Eq. (114). As for the first of the equations (C4), the use of Eq. (C6) and
substitution of δB⊥ = −ẑ × ∇⊥ Ak turns it into the previously derived Eq. (C2), whence follows Eq. (113).
Thus, we have shown that Eqs. (113-114) can be derived as a direct consequence of Faraday's law, electron fluid dynamics
(electron continuity equation and the electron force balance, a. k. a. the generalized Ohm's law), and the assumption of isothermal
electrons-all taken to the leading order in the gyrokinetic ordering given in § 3.1 (i.e., assuming strongly interacting anisotropic
fluctuations with kk ≪ k⊥ ).
We have just proved that Eqs. (113) and (114) are simply the perpendicular and parallel part, respectively, of Eq. (C3). The
latter equation means that the magnetic-field lines are frozen into the electron flow velocity ue , i.e., the flux is conserved, the
result formally proven in § 4.3 [see Eq. (96)].
C.2. Electron MHD and the Derivation of Eqs. (206-207)

One route to Eqs. (206-207), already explained in § 7.1, is to start with Eqs. (C2) and (C7) and assume Boltzmann electrons
and ions and the total pressure balance. Another approach, more standard in the litearture on the Hall and Electron MHD, is to
start with Eq. (C3), which states that the magnetic field is frozen into the electron flow. The electron velocity can be written in
terms of the ion velocity and the current density, and the latter then related to the magnetic field via Ampère's law:
ue = ui −

c
j
= ui −
∇ × B.
ene
4πene

(C8)

To the leading order in ǫ, the perpendicular and parallel parts of Eq. (C3) are Eqs. (C4), respectively, where the perpendicular and
parallel electron velocities are [from Eq. (C8)]
c
c
u⊥e = u⊥i +
ẑ × ∇⊥ δBk , uke = uki +
∇2 Ak .
(C9)
4πen0e
4πen0e ⊥
√
The relative size of the two terms in each of these expressions is controlled by the size of k⊥ di , where di = ρi / βi is the ion
inertial scale. When k⊥ di ≫ 1, we may set ui = 0. Note, however, that the ion motion is not totally neglected: indeed, in the
second of the equations (C4), the δne /ne terms comes, via Eq. (C5), from the divergence of the ion velocity [from Eq. (C8),
∇ * ui = ∇ * ue ]. To complete the derivation, we relate δne to δBk via the assumption of total pressure balance, as explained in
§ 7.1, giving us Eq. (205). Substituting this equation and Eqs. (C9) into Eqs. (C4), we obtain
δBk
∂Ψ
,
= v2A di b̂ * ∇
∂t
B0

∂ δBk
di
=−
b̂ * ∇∇2⊥ Ψ,
∂t B0
1 + 2/βi(1 + Z/τ )

(C10)

√
where Ψ = −Ak / 4πmi n0i . Equations (C10) evolve the perturbed magnetic field. These equations become the ERMHD equations
(206-207) if δBk /B0 is expressed in terms of the scalar potential via Eq. (203).
Note that there are two special limits in which the assumption of immobile ions suffices to derive Eqs. (C10) from Eq. (C3)
without the need for the pressure balance: βi ≫ 1 (incompressible ions) or τ = T0i /T0e ≪ 1 (cold ions) but βe = βi Z/τ ≫ 1.
In both cases, Eq. (205) shows that δne /n0e ≪ δBk /B0 , so the density perturbation can be ignored and the coefficient of the
right-hand-side of the second of the equations (C10) is equal to 1. The limit of cold ions is discussed further in Appendix E.
D. FLUID LIMIT OF THE KINETIC RMHD

Taking the fluid (collisional) limit of the KRMHD system (summarized in § 5.7) means carrying out another subsidiary
expansion-this time in kk λmfpi ≪ 1. The expansion only affects the equations for the density and magnetic-field-strength
fluctuations (§ 5.5) because the Alfvén waves are indifferent to collisional effects.
The calculation presented below follows a standard perturbation algorithm used in the kinetic theory of gases and in plasma
physics to derive fluid equations with collisional transport coefficients (Chapman & Cowling 1970). For magnetized plasma,
this calculation was carried out in full generality by Braginskii (1965), whose starting point was the full plasma kinetic theory
[Eqs. (36-39)]. While what we do below is, strictly speaking, merely a particular case of his calculation (see Appendix A), it has
the advantage of relative simplicity and also serves to show how the fluid limit is recovered from the gyrokinetic formalism-a
demonstration that we believe to be of value.

50

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

It will be convenient to use the KRMHD system written in terms of the function δ f ̃i = g + (v2⊥ /v2thi )(δBk /B0 )F0i , which is the
perturbation of the local Maxwellian in the frame of the Alfvén waves [Eqs. (147-149)]. We want to expand Eq. (147) in powers
(1)
of kk λmfpi , so we let δ f ̃i = δ f ̃i(0) + δ f ̃i(1) + . . ., δBk = δB(0)
k + δBk + . . ., etc.
D.1. Zeroth Order: Ideal Fluid Equations

Since [see Eq. (48)]
kk vk
kk vA
kk λmfpi
kk vthi
ω
,
∼
∼ √
∼
∼ kk λmfpi ,
(D1)
νii
νii
νii
νii
βi
iE
D h
= 0. The zero mode of the collision operator is a Maxwellian. Therefore, we
to zeroth order Eq. (147) becomes Cii δ f ̃i(0)
Ri

may write the full ion distribution function up to zeroth order in kk λmfpi as follows [see Eq. (141)]
)
(
mi [(v⊥ − uE )2 + (vk − uk )2 ]
ni
fi =
,
3/2 exp −
2Ti
2πTi /mi

(D2)

where ni = n0i + δni and Ti = T0i + δTi include both the unperturbed quatities and their perturbations. The E × B drift velocity uE
comes from the Alfvén waves (see § 5.4) and does not concern us here. Since the perturbations δni , uk and δTi are small in the
original gyrokinetic expansion, Eq. (D2) is equivalent to
#
"

 2
3 δTi(0) 2vk (0)
v
δn(0)
(0)
e
 ̃
(D3)
+ 2 −
+ 2 uk F0i ,
δ fi =
n0e
T0i
vthi 2
vthi
where we have used quasineutrality to replace δni /n0i = δne /n0e . This automatically satisfies Eq. (148), while Eq. (149) gives us
an expression for the ion-temperature perturbation:


(0)
δTi(0)
Z δn(0)
2 δBk
e
= − 1+
−
.
(D4)
T0i
τ
n0e βi B0
Note that this is consistent with the interpretation of the perpendicular Ampère's law [Eq. (61), which is the progenitor of
Eq. (149)] as the pressure balance [see Eq. (65)]: indeed, recalling that the electron pressure perturbation is δ pe = T0e δne
[Eq. (100)], we have
δ

B2 B20 δBk
= −δ pe − δ pi = −δne T0e − δni T0i − n0i δTi ,
=
8π 4π B0

(D5)

whence follows Eq. (D4) by way of quasineutrality (Zni = ne ) and the definitions of Z, τ , βi [Eqs. (40-42)].
Since the collision operator conserves particle number, momentum and energy, we can obtain evolution equations for δn(0)
e /n0e ,
(0)
(0)
2 2
uk and δBk /B0 by multiplying Eq. (147) by 1, vk , v /vthi , respectively, and integrating over the velocity space. The three
moments that emerge this way are
!
Z
Z
Z
(0)
(0)
(0)
2
δn
1
δT
1
δn
v
1
3
(0)
(0)
(0)
(0)
e
.
(D6)
+ i
d 3 v δ f ̃i = e ,
d 3 v vk δ f ̃i = uk ,
d 3 v 2 δ f ̃i =
n0i
n0e
n0i
n0i
2 n0e
T0i
vthi
The three evolution equations for these moments are
d
dt
du(0)
k

δB(0)
δn(0)
k
e
−
n0e
B0
− v2A b̂ * ∇

dt
"
d 3
dt 2

!

δB(0)
k
B0

+ b̂ * ∇u(0)
k = 0,
= 0,
!

δn(0)
δT (0)
e
+ i
n0e
T0i

(D7)

(D8)
(0) #

5 δBk
−
2 B0

5
+ b̂ * ∇u(0)
k = 0.
2

(D9)

These allow us to recover the fluid equations we derived in § 2.4: Eq. (D8) is the parallel component of the MHD momentum
equation (27); combining Eqs. (D7), (D9) and (D4), we obtain the continuity equation and the parallel component of the induction
equation-these are the same as Eqs. (25) and (26):
1
d δn(0)
e
=−
b̂ * ∇u(0)
k ,
dt n0e
1 + c2s /v2A

(0)
1
d δBk
=
b̂ * ∇u(0)
k ,
dt B0
1 + v2A /c2s

(D10)

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

51

where the sound speed cs is defined by Eq. (163). From Eqs. (D7) and (D9), we also find the analog of the entropy equation (23):
!


(0)
(0)
(0)
(0)
(0)
2 δB(0)
δs
δn
δn
d
δs
δT
2
v
Z
5
d δTi(0) 2 d δn(0)
k
e
e
e
.
(D11)
=
⇔
= 0,
= i −
=−
+ A
+
dt T0i
3 dt n0e
dt s0
s0
T0i
3 n0e
3 τ
n0e c2s B0
This implies that the temperature changes due to compressional heating only.
D.2. Generalized Energy: Five RMHD Cascades Recovered

We now calculate the generalized energy by substituting δ f ̃i from Eq. (D3) into Eq. (150) and using Eqs. (D4) and (D11):
"
#

Z
2
2 
v2A
3
mi n0i u2E δB2⊥ mi n0i uk δBk
1 + Z/τ δs2
1 + Z/τ
3
3
1 + 2 + n0i T0i
W= d r
+
+
+
Ws .
= W⊥+ + W⊥− + Wk+ + Wk− + n0i T0i
2
2
8π
2
8π
cs
4
5/3 + Z/τ s0
2
5/3 + Z/τ
(D12)
The first two terms are the Alfvén-wave energy [Eq. (151)]. The following two terms are the slow-wave energy, which splits into
the independently cascaded energies of "+" and "−" waves (see § 2.5):
Z

mi n0i  + 2
(D13)
|zk | + |z−k |2 .
WSW = Wk+ + Wk− = d 3 r
2
The last term is the total variance of the entropy mode. Thus, we have recovered the five cascades of the RMHD system (§ 2.7).

D.3. First Order: Collisional Transport
Now let us compute the collisional transport terms for the equations derived above. In order to do this, we have to determine
the first-order perturbed distribution function δ f ̃i(1) , which satisfies [see Eq. (147)]
!


iE
D h
2 δB(0)
(0)
d
v
k
(1)
(0)
(0) Z δne
⊥
 ̃
 ̃
 ̃
=
(D14)
δ fi − 2
Cii δ fi
+ vk b̂ * ∇ δ fi +
F0i .
dt
τ n0e
Ri
vthi B0

We now use Eq. (D3) to substitute for δ f ̃i(0) and Eqs. (D10-D11) and (D8) to compute the time derivatives. Equation (D14)
becomes
"
#
 2

(0)
iE
D h
2
2 2

v
5
2/3
+
c
/v
v
δT
s A
= − 1 − 3ξ 2 2
b̂ * ∇u(0)
−
Cii δ f ̃i(1)
b̂ * ∇ i
F0i (v),
(D15)
k + ξv
T0i
Ri
vthi 1 + c2s /v2A
v2thi 2

where ξ = vk /v. Note that the right-hand side gives zero when multiplied by 1, vk or v2 and integrated over the velocity space, as
it must do because the collision operator in the left-hand side conserves particle number, momentum and energy.
Solving Eq. (D15) requires inverting the collision operator. While this can be done for the general Landau collision operator
(see Braginskii 1965), for our purposes, it is sufficient to use the model operator given in Appendix B.3, Eq. (B17). This simplifies
calculations at the expense of an order-one inaccuracy in the numerical values of the transport coefficients. As the exact value of
these coefficients will never be crucial for us, this is an acceptable loss of precision. Inverting the collision operator in Eq. (D15)
then gives
"
#
 2

(0)
2 2
2 2
1
−
3ξ
5
2/3
+
c
/v
v
1
v
δT
(0)
(1)
s
A
i
b̂ * ∇uk − ξv 2 −
δ f ̃i = ii
F0i (v),
(D16)
b̂ * ∇
3 v2thi 1 + c2s /v2A
T0i
νD (v)
vthi 2
where νDii (v) is a collision frequency defined
in Eq. (B11)
R the constants of integration in such a way that the
R and we have chosen
R
three conservation laws are respected: d 3 v δ f ̃i(1) = 0, d 3 v vk δ f ̃i(1) = 0, d 3 v v2 δ f ̃i(1) = 0. These relations mean that δn(1)
e = 0,
(1)
(1)
uk = 0, δTi = 0 and that, in view of Eq. (149), we have
δB(1)
k
B0

=−

1 2/3 + c2s /v2A
νki b̂ * ∇uk ,
3v2A 1 + c2s /v2A

(D17)

where νki is defined below [Eq. (D21)]. Equations (D16-D17) are now used to calculate the first-order corrections to the moment
equations (D7-D9). They become


d δne δBk
+ b̂ * ∇uk = 0,
(D18)
−
dt n0e B0

δBk 2/3 + c2s /v2A
duk 2
νki b̂ * ∇ b̂ * ∇uk ,
(D19)
=
− vAb̂ * ∇
2
2
dt
B0
1 + cs /vA


δTi
d δTi 2 d δne
−
= κki b̂ * ∇ b̂ * ∇
,
(D20)
dt T0i 3 dt n0e
T0i

52

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

where we have introduced the coefficients of parallel viscosity and parallel thermal diffusivity:

 2
Z
Z
2 1
v4
v4
2 1
v
5
3
F0i (v).
νki =
d 3 v ii
d
v
F
(v),
κ
=
−
0i
ki
15 n0i
9 n0i
νD (v)v2thi
νDii (v)v2thi v2thi 2

(D21)

All perturbed quantities are now accurate up to first order in kk λmfpi . Note that in Eq. (D19), we used Eq. (D17) to express
(1)
δB(0)
k = δBk − δBk . We do the same in Eq. (D4) and obtain


1+

Z
τ



δne
δTi 2
=−
−
n0e
T0i βi




δBk
1 2/3 + c2s /v2A
ν
b̂
*
∇u
+ 2
ki
k .
B0 3vA 1 + c2s /v2A

(D22)

This equation completes the system (D18-D20), which allows us to determine δne , uk , δTi and δBk . In § 6.1, we use the equations
derived above, but absorb the prefactor (2/3 + c2s /v2A )/(1 + c2s /v2A ) into the definition of νki . The same system of equations can also
be derived from Braginskii's two-fluid theory (Appendix A.4), from which we can borrow the quantitatively correct values of the
viscosity and ion thermal diffusivity: νki = 0.90v2thi /νii , κki = 2.45v2thi /νii , where νii is defined in Eq. (51).
E. REDUCED HALL MHD

The popular Hall MHD approximation consists in assuming that the magnetic field is frozen into the electron flow velocity
[Eq. (C3)]. The latter is calculated from the ion flow velocity and the current determined by Ampère's law [Eq. (C8)]:



c
∂B
∇×B ×B ,
(E1)
= ∇ × ui −
∂t
4πen0e
where the ion flow velocity ui satisfies the conventional MHD momentum equation (8). The Hall MHD is an appealing theoretical
model that appears to capture both the MHD behavior at long wavelengths (when ue ≃ ui ) and some of the kinetic effects that
become important at small scales due to decoupling between the electron and ion flows (the appearance of dispersive waves)
without bringing in the full complexity of the kinetic theory. However, unlike the kinetic theory, it completely ignores the
collisionless
damping effects and suggests that the keypsmall-scale physical change is associated with the ion inertial scale
√
di = ρi / βi (or, when βe ≪ 1, the ion sound scale ρs = ρi Z/2τ ; see § E.2), rather than the ion gyroscale ρi . Is this an acceptable
model for plasma turbulence? Figure 7 illustrates the fact that at τ ∼ 1, the ion inertial scale does not play a special role linearly,
the MHD Alfvén wave becomes dispersive at the ion gyroscale, not at di , and that the collisionless damping cannot in general
be neglected. A detailed comparison of the Hall MHD linear dispersion relation with full hot plasma dispersion relation leads to
the conclusion that Hall MHD is only a valid approximation in the limit of cold ions, namely, τ = T0i /T0e ≪ 1 (Ito et al. 2004;
Hirose et al. 2004). In this Appendix, we show that a reduced (low-frequency, anisotropic) version of Hall MHD can, indeed, be
derived from gyrokinetics in the limit τ ≪ 1.41 This demonstrates that the Hall MHD model fits into the theoretical framework
proposed in this paper as a special limit. However, the parameter regime that gives rise to this special limit is not common in
space and astrophysical plasmas of interest.
E.1. Gyrokinetic Derivation of Reduced Hall MHD

Let us start with the equations of isothermal electron fluid, Eqs. (113-118), i.e., work within the assumptions that allowed us
to carry out the mass-ratio expansion (§ 4.8). In Eq. (117) (perpendicular Ampère's law, or gyrokinetic pressure balance), taking
the limit τ ≪ 1 gives
(
)
Z
δBk βi Z Zeφ X ik*r 1
βe δne
3
=
−
,
(E2)
e
d v J0 (ai )hik = −
B0
2 τ
T0i
n0i
2 n0e
k

where we have used Eq. (115) to express the hi integral and the expression for the electron beta βe = βi Z/τ . Note that the above
equation is simply the statement of a balance between the magnetic and electron thermal pressure (the ions are relatively cold,
so they have fallen out of the pressure balance). Using Eq. (E2) to express δne in terms of δBk in Eqs. (113) and (114) and also
substituting for uke from Eq. (116) [or, equivalently, Eq. (85)], we get



δBk
∂Ψ
d δBk
1
,
=
= vA b̂ * ∇ Φ + vAdi
b̂ * ∇ uki − di ∇2⊥ Ψ ,
(E3)
∂t
B0
dt B0
1 + 2/βe
where we have used our usual definitions of the stream and flux functions [Eq. (132)] and of the full derivatives [Eq. (157)].
These equations determine the evolution of the magnetic field, but we still need the ion gyrokinetic equation (118) to calculate
the ion motion (Φ = cφ/B0 and uki ) via Eqs. (115) and (86). There are two limits in which the ion kinetics can be reduced to
simple fluid models.
41 Note that, strictly speaking, our ordering of the collision frequency does not allow us to take this limit (see footnote 15), but this is a minor betrayal of rigor,
which does not, in fact, invalidate the results.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

53

E.1.1. High-Ion-Beta Limit, βi ≫ 1

√
In this limit, k⊥ ρi = k⊥ di βi ≫ 1 as long as k⊥ di is not small. Then the ion motion can be neglected because it is averaged out
by the Bessel functions in Eqs. (115) and (86)-in the same way as in § 7.1. So we get Φ = (τ /Z)vA di δBk /B0 [using Eq. (E2);
this is the τ ≪ 1 limit of Eq. (203)] and uki = 0. Noting that βe = βi Z/τ ≫ 1 in this limit, we find that Eqs. (E3) reduce to
∂ δBk
= −di b̂ * ∇∇2⊥ Ψ,
∂t B0

δBk
∂Ψ
,
= v2A di b̂ * ∇
∂t
B0

(E4)

which is the τ ≪ 1 limit of our ERMHD equations (206-207) [or, equivalently, Eqs. (C10)].
E.1.2. Low-Ion-Beta Limit, βi ∼ τ ≪ 1

This limit is similar to the RMHD limit worked out in § 5: we take, for now, k√⊥ di ∼ 1 and βe ∼ 1 (in which subsidiary
expansions can be carried out later), and expand the ion gyrokinetics in k⊥ ρi = k⊥ di βi ≪ 1. Note that ordering βe ∼ 1 means
that we have ordered βi ∼ τ ≪ 1. We now proceed analogously to the way we did in § 5: express the ion distribution in terms of
the g function defined by Eq. (121) and, using the relation (E2) between δBk /B0 and δne /n0e , write Eqs. (122-124) as follows:
(
+
)
v k A k v ⊥ * A⊥
∂g
∂g c
+ vk +
φ −
−
, g − hCii [g]iRi
∂t
∂z B0
c
c
Ri
|{z} | {z }
|{z} | {z } | {z }
| {z }
−1

−1

0

"

Ze
vk
=
T0i

*

0

1

0

* 
 !+
+ #


1 
v ⊥ * A⊥
T0e 2 δBk
v ⊥ * A⊥
−
,(E5)
φ −
+
Ak , φ − hφiRi +b̂ * ∇
F0i + Cii
F0i
B0
e βe B 0
c
c
Ri
Ri
Ri
Ri
|
| {z } |
|{z} | {z }
{z
}
{z
}
−1

1

1

1




Z
 Zeφk
1
2 δBkk 
+ 1 − Γ0(αi )
=
− Γ1 (αi ) +
d 3 v J0 (ai )gk ,
βe B 0
T0i
n0i
{z
} |
{z
} |
{z
}
|
0

−1

0

1
ukki =
n0i
|{z} |

Z

1

d 3 v vk J0 (ai )gk .

−1

{z
−1

(E6)

}

√
All terms in these equations can be ordered with respect to the small parameter βi (an expansion subsidiary to the gyrokinetic
expansion in ǫ and the Hall expansion in τ ≪ 1). The lowest order to which
√ they enter is indicated underneath each term. The
ordering we use is the same as in § 5.2, but now we count the powers of βi and order formally k⊥ di ∼ 1 and βe ∼ 1. It is easy
to check that this ordering can be summarized as follows
Zeφ
1 δBk
∼
,
T0i
βi B 0

δBk
δB⊥
∼
,
B0
B0

uk
g
1 δBk
∼
∼√
F0i
vthi
βi B 0

(E7)

and that the ion and electron terms in Eqs. (E3) are comparable under this ordering, so their competition is retained (in fact, this
could be used as the underlying assumption behind the ordering). The fluctuation
frequency continues to be ordered as the Alfvén
√
frequency, ω ∼ kk vA . The collision terms are ordered via ω/νii ∼ kk λmfpi / βi and kk λmfpi ∼ 1, although the latter assumption is
not essential for what follows, because collisions turn out to be negligible and it is fine to take kk λmfpi ≫ 1 from the outset and
neglect them completely.
2 2
In Eqs. (E6), we use Eqs. (126) and (127) to
1 − Γ0 (αi ) ≃ αi = k⊥
ρi /2 and Γ1 (αi ) ≃ 1. These equations imply that if
R to3 write
(−1)
(0)
(−1)
we expand g = g + g + . . ., we must have d vg = 0, so the contribution to the right-hand side of the first of the equations
(E6) (the quasineutrality equation) comes from g(0) , while the parallel ion flow is determined by g(−1) . Retaining only the lowest
(minus first) order terms in Eq. (E5), we find the equation for g(−1) , the vk moment of which gives an equation for uki :
δBk
2
∂g(−1) c
F0i
+ {φ, g(−1) } = vk b̂ * ∇
∂t
B0
βi
B0

⇒

duki
δBk
.
= v2A b̂ * ∇
dt
B0

(E8)

Now integrating Eq. (E5) over the velocity space (at constant r), using the first of the equations (E6) to express the integral of
g(0) , and retaining only the lowest (zeroth) order terms, we find




d
1 2 2 Zeφ
d 2
2 δBk
− ρi ∇⊥
+ b̂ * ∇uki = 0 ⇒
− 1+
(E9)
∇ Φ = vA b̂ * ∇∇2⊥ Ψ,
dt
2
T0i
βe B 0
dt ⊥
where we have used the second of the equations (E3) to express the time derivative of δBk /B0 .
Together with Eqs. (E3), Eqs. (E8) and (E9) form a closed system, which it is natural to call Reduced Hall MHD because
these equations can be straightforwardly derived by applying the RMHD ordering (§ 2.1) to the MHD equations (8-10) with the
induction equation (10) replaced by Eq. (E1). Indeed, Eqs. (E8) and (E9) exactly coincide with Eqs. (27) and (18), which are
the parallel and perpendicular components of the MHD momentum equation (8) under the RMHD ordering; Eqs. (E3) should

54

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

p
be compared Eqs. (17) and (26) while noticing that, in the limit τ ≪ 1, the sound speed is cs = vA βe /2 [see Eq. (163)]. The
incompressible case (Mahajan & Yoshida 1998) is recovered in the subsidiary limit βe ≫ 1 (i.e., 1 ≫ βi ≫ τ ). Note that exact
nonlinear solutions of Eqs. (E3) and (E8-E9) can be derived via a calculation analogous to that in § 7.2 (for the incompressible
Hall MHD, this was done by Mahajan & Krishan 2005).
E.2. Reduced Hall MHD Dispersion Relation and the Role of the Ion Inertial and Ion Sound Scales

Linearizing the Reduced Hall MHD equations (E3), (E8) and (E9) (derived in § E.1.2 in the limit βi ∼ τ ≪ 1), we obtain the
following dispersion relation:42
!


kk2 v2A
k2 d 2
2
2
2 2
ω −
ω − kk vA
= ω 2 kk2 v2A ⊥ i .
(E10)
1 + 2/βe
1 + 2/βe
p
When the coupling term on the right-hand side is negligible, k⊥ di / 1 + 2/βe ≪ 1, we recover the MHD Alfvén wave, ω 2 = kk2 v2A ,
p
and the MHD slow wave, ω 2 = kk2 v2A /(1 + v2A/c2s ) [Eq. (164)], where cs = vA βe /2 in the limit τ ≪ 1 [Eq. (163)]. In the opposite
2 2
limit, we get the kinetic Alfvén wave, ω 2 = kk2 v2A k⊥
di /(1 + 2/βe) [same as Eq. (210) with τ ≪ 1].
The dispersion relation takes a particularly simple form in the subsidiary limits of high and low electron beta βe = βi Z/τ :


s
2

2 2
2
2
kk2 c2s

k⊥ d i
k⊥ d i
2
2
2 2
2 2
2
2 2

, (E11)
βe ≫ 1 : ω = k k v A 1 +
−1 ,
±
βe ≪ 1 : ω = kk vA 1 + k⊥ρs and ω =
1+
2 ρ2
2
2
1 + k⊥
s

p
p
where ρs = di βe /2 = ρi Z/2τ = cs /Ωi is called the ion sound scale. The Alfvén wave and the slow wave (known as the ion
acoustic wave in the limit of τ ≪ 1, βe ≪ 1) become dispersive at the ion inertial scale (k⊥ di ∼ 1) when βe ≫ 1 and at the ion
sound scale (k⊥ ρs ∼ 1) when βe ≪ 1.
These conclusions also hold for the more general nonlinear equations derived in § E.1.2: thep
ion motion decouples from the
magnetic-field evolution and Eqs. (E3) turn into our ERMHD equations (206-207) when k⊥ di / 1 + 2/βe ≫ 1; in the opposite
limit, the Reduced Hall MHD turns into RMHD, with Eqs. (E3) becoming Eqs. (17) and (26). For βe ≫ 1, this means that the
transition occurs at the ion inertial scale k⊥ di ∼ 1, while nothing happens at the ion sound scale ρs ≫ di . For βe ≪ 1, the transition
occurs at the ion sound scale k⊥ ρs ∼ 1, while the ion inertial scale di ≫ ρs is irrelevant. Since we are considering the case βi ≪ 1,
both di and ρs are much larger than the ion gyroscale ρi .
In the opposite limit of βi ≫ 1 (§ E.1.1), while di is the only scale that appears explicitly in Eqs. (E4), we have di ≪ ρi and the
equations themselves represent the dynamics at scales much smaller than the ion gyroscale, so the transition between the RMHD
and ERMHD regimes occurs at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1. The same is true for βi ∼ 1, when di ∼ ρi . The ion sound scale ρs ≫ ρi does not play
a special role here: it is not hard to see that for k⊥ ρs ∼ 1, the ion p
motion terms in Eqs. (E3) dominate and we simply recover the
inertial-range KRMHD model (§ 5) by expanding in k⊥ ρi = k⊥ ρs 2τ /Z ≪ 1.
F. TWO-DIMENSIONAL INVARIANTS IN GYROKINETICS

Since gyrokinetics is in a sense a "quasi-two-dimensional" approximation, it is natural to inquire if this gives rise to additional
conservation properties (besides the conservation of the generalized energy discussed in § 3.4) and how they are broken by the
presence of parallel propagation terms. It is important to emphasize that, except in a few special cases, these invariants are only
invariants in 2D, so gyrokinetic turbulence in 2D and 3D has fundamentally different properties, despite its seemingly "quasi-2D"
nature. It is, therefore, generally not correct to think of the gyrokinetic turbulence (or its special case the MHD turbulence) as
essentially a 2D turbulence with an admixture of parallel-propagating waves (Fyfe et al. 1977; Montgomery & Turner 1981).
In this Appendix, we work out the 2D invariants. Without attempting to present a complete analysis of the 2D conservation
properties of gyrokinetics, we limit our discussion to showing how some more familiar fluid invariants (most notably, magnetic
helicity) emerge from the general 2D invariants in the appropriate asymptotic limits.
F.1. General 2D Invariants

R
In deriving the generalized energy invariant, we used the fact that d 3 Rs hs {hχiRs , hs } = 0, so Eq. (55) after multiplication
Rby 3T0s hs /F0s and integration over space contains no contribution from the Poisson-bracket nonlinearity. Since we also have
d Rs hχiRs {hχiRs , hs } = 0, multiplying Eq. (55) by qs hχiRs and integrating over space has a similar outcome. Subtracting the
latter integrated equation from the former and rearranging terms gives
2




Z
Z
Z
∂hs T0s
∂hs
∂ T0s
∂Is
qs hχiRs
qs hχiRs
.
(F1)
F0s = qs vk d 3 Rs hχiRs
F0s
≡
+
d 3 Rs h s −
d 3 Rs h s −
∂t
∂t 2F0s
T0s
∂z F0s
T0s
∂t c
We see that in a purely 2D situation, when ∂/∂z = 0, we have an infinite family of invariants Is = Is (v⊥ , vk ) whose conservation (for
each species and for every value of v⊥ and vk !) is broken only by collisions. In 3D, the parallel particle streaming (propagation)
term in the gyrokinetic equation generally breaks these invariants, although special cases may arise in which the first term on the
right-hand side of Eq. (F1) vanishes and a genuine 3D invariant appears.
42

The full gyrokinetic dispersion relation in a similar limit was worked out in Howes et al. (2006), Appendix D.2.1.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

55

F.2. "A2k -Stuff"

Let apply the mass-ratio expansion (§ 4.1) to Eq. (F1) for electrons. Using the solution (98) for the electron distribution
function, we find
" 2 2
#
2



Z
Z
Z
A2k evk
∂Ie ∂ T0e F0e
∂ e vk F0e
δne e vk Ak v2⊥ δBk
δne v2⊥ δBk
3
3
3
+ ***
−
=
−
=
− 2
−
F0e d r Ak
d r
d r
∂t ∂t 2
n0e T0e c
∂t c2 T0e
2
c
n0e v2the B0
vthe B0


 



Z
Z
evk
vk Ak ∂h(1)
vk Ak T0e v2⊥ δBk ∂ δne eφ
∂he
e
3
−
,
(F2)
F
−
−
−
d
r
A
= −evk d 3 r φ −
0e
k
c
e v2the B0 ∂z n0e T0e
c ∂z
c
∂t c
where we have kept terms to two leading orders in the expansion. To lowest order, the above equation reduces to


Z
Z
A2k
d
∂ T0e δne
3
3
−φ .
= c d r Ak
d r
dt
2
∂z e n0e

(F3)

This equation can also be obtained directly from Eq. (113) (multiply by Ak and integrate). In 2D, it expresses a well known
conservation law of the "A2k -stuff." As this 2D invariant exists already on the level of the mass-ratio expansion of the electron
kinetics, with no assumptions about the ions, it is inherited both by the RMHD equations in the limit of k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 (§ 5.3) and
by the ERMHD equations in the limit of k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 (§ 7.1). In the former limit, δne /n0e on the right-hand side of Eq. (F3) is
negligible (under the ordering explained in § 5.2); in the latter limit, it is expressed in terms of φ via Eq. (201). The conservation
of "A2k -stuff" is a uniquely 2D feature, broken by the parallel propagation term in 3D.
F.3. Magnetic Helicity in the Electron Fluid

If we now divide Eq. (F2) through by evk /c and integrate over velocities, we get, after some integrations by parts, another
relation that becomes a conservation law in 2D and that can also easily be derived directly from the equations of the isothermal
electron fluid (113-114):






Z
Z
∂uke
δne ∂φ δBk ∂ T0e δne
δne δBk
d
.
(F4)
= − c d3r
−
− φ + Ak
+
d 3 r Ak
dt
n0e B0
n0e ∂z B0 ∂z e n0e
∂z
In the ERMHD limit k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 (§ 7.1), we use Eqs. (201-203) to simplify the above equation and find that the integral on the
right-hand side vanishes and we get a genuine 3D conservation law:
Z
d
d 3 r Ak δBk = 0.
(F5)
dt
This can also be derived directly from the ERMHD equations (206-207) [using Eq. (203)]. The conserved quantity is readily seen
to be the helicity of the perturbed magnetic field:
Z
Z
Z
Z





d 3 r A * δB = d 3 r A⊥ * ∇⊥ × Ak ẑ + Ak δBk = d 3 r Ak ẑ * (∇⊥ × A⊥ ) + Ak δBk = 2 d 3 r Ak δBk .
(F6)
F.4. Magnetic Helicity in the RMHD Limit
Unlike in the case of ERMHD, the helicity of the perturbed magnetic field in RMHD is conserved only in 2D. This is because
the induction equation for the perturbed field has an inhomogeneous term associated with the mean field [Eq. (10) with B =
B0 ẑ + δB] (this issue has been extensively discussed in the literature; see Matthaeus & Goldstein 1982; Stribling et al. 1994;
Berger 1997; Montgomery & Bates 1999; Brandenburg & Matthaeus 2004). Directly from the induction equation or from its
RMHD descendants Eqs. (17) and (26), we obtain [note the definitions (132)]


Z
Z
B0 Ak ∂uk
∂δBk
d
,
(F7)
+
d 3 r Ak δBk = d 3 r cφ
dt
∂z
1 + v2A /c2s ∂z

so helicity is conserved only if ∂/∂z = 0.
For completeness, let us now show that this 2D conservation law is a partucular case of Eq. (F1) for ions. Let us consider
the inertial range (k⊥ ρi ≪ 1). We substitute Eq. (121) into Eq. (F1) for ions and expand to two leading orders in k⊥ ρi using the
ordering explained in § 5.2:
!
2

Z
Z
2 2 2
A2k Zevk Z 3
∂ Z e vk F0i
Ze vk hAk iRi
∂Ii ∂ T0i
3
3
=
F0i =
+
d r Ak g + * * *
d Ri g +
d r
∂t ∂t 2F0i
T0i
c
∂t
c2 T0i
2
c






Z
Z
Z 2 e2 v2k F0i Z 3
vk Ak ∂g Zevk
∂hi
T0i v2⊥ δBk
∂
3
3
.
(F8)
+
φ+
d
r
A
d r Ak
+
Zev
d
r
φ
−
=−
k
k
c T0i
∂z
Ze v2thi B0
c
∂z
c
∂t c

56

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

The lowest-order terms in the above equations (all proportional to v2k F0i ) simply reproduce the 2D conservation of "A2k -stuff,"
given by Eq. (F3). We now subtract Eq. (F3) multiplied by (Zevk /c)2 F0i /T0i from Eq. (F8). This leaves us with






Z
Z
Z
Z
vk Ak ∂g
∂
∂hi
Z δne v2⊥ δBk ∂Ak
3
3
3
3
.
(F9)
+
+ vk F0i d r
+ d r Ak
d r Ak g = c d r φ −
∂t
c
∂z
τ n0e v2thi B0
∂z
∂t c
This equation is a general 2D conservation law of the KRMHD equations (see § 5.7) and can also be derived directly from them.
If we integrate it over velocities and use Eqs. (143) and (144), we simply recover Eq. (F4). However, since Eq. (F9) holds for
every value of vk and v⊥ , it carries much more information than Eq. (F4).
To make connection to MHD, let us consider the fluid (collisional) limit of KRMHD worked out in Appendix D. The distribution function to lowest order in the kk λmfpi ≪ 1 expansion is g = −(v2⊥ /v2thi )δBk /B0 + δ f ̃i(0) , where δ f ̃i(0) is the perturbed Maxwellian
given by Eq. (D3). We can substitute this expression into Eq. (F9). Since in this expansion the collision integral is applied to δ f ̃i(1)
and is the same order as the rest of the terms (see § D.3), conservation laws are best derived by taking 1, vk , and v2 /v2thi moments
of Eq. (F9) so as to make the collision term vanish. In particular, multiplying
(F9) by 1 + (2τ /3Z)v2/v2thi , integrating over
R Eq.
3
velocities and using Eqs. (D4) and (D6), we obtain the evolution equation for dRr Ak δBk , whichRcoincides with Eq. (F7). Note
that, either proceeding in an analogous way, one can derive similar equations for d 3 r Ak δne and d 3 r Ak uk -these are also 2D
invariants of the RMHD system, broken in 3D by the presence of the propagation terms. The same result can be derived directly
from from the evolution equations (D8) and (D10).
F.5. Electrostatic Invariant

Interestingly, the existence of the general 2D invariants introduced in § F.1 alongside the generalized energy invariant given by
Eq. (71) means that one can construct a 2D invariant of gyrokinetics that does not involve any velocity-space quantities. In order
to do that, one must integrate Eq. (F1) over velocities, sum over species, and subtract Eq. (71) from the resulting equation (thus
removing the h2s integrals). The result is not particularly edifying in the general case, but it takes a simple form if one considers
electrostatic perturbations (δB = 0). In this case, χ = φ, and the manipulations described above lead to the following equation
!


Z
Z
Z
X Z

dY
d X X q2s n0s 
d X
∂hs
3
, (F10)
d v Is − W = −
≡
1 − Γ0 (αs ) |φk |2 = d 3 r Ek jk −
qs d 3 v d 3 Rs hφiRs
dt
dt
dt s
2T0s
∂t c
s
s
k

where Ek = −∂φ/∂z, αs =
and Γ0 is defined by Eq. (126). In 2D, Ek = 0 and the above equation expresses a conservation
law broken only by collisions. The complete derivation and analysis of 2D conservation properties of gyrokinetics in the electrostatic limit, including the invariant (F10), the electrostatic version of Eq. (F1), and their consequences for scalings and cascades,
was given by Plunk (2008). Here we briefly consider a few relevant limits.
For
the E × B flows:
R of
R have Γ0 (α) = 1 − αs + . . ., so the invariant given by Eq. (F10) is simply the kinetic energy
Pk⊥ ρi ≪ 1, we
3
2 2 2
d
r
Z
e φ /2T0i . In
.
In
the
limit
k
ρ
≫
1,
k
ρ
≪
1,
we
have
Y
=
−n
Y = s (ms n0s /2) d 3 r |∇⊥ Φ|2 , where Φ = cφ/B
0
⊥
i
⊥
e
0i
R 3 2 2
the limit k⊥ ρe ≫ 1, we have Y = −(1 + Z/τ )n0e d r e φ /2T0e . Whereas we are not interested in electrostatic fluctuations in the
inertial range, electrostatic turbulence in the dissipation range was discussed in § 7.7 and § 7.8. The electrostatic 2D invariant in
the limits k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, k⊥ ρe ≪ 1 and k⊥ ρe ≫ 1 can also be derived directly from the equations given there [in the former limit, use
Eq. (241) to express uki in terms of jk in order to get Eq. (F10)].
Note that, taken separately and integrated over velocities, Eq. (F1) for ions (when
R 3 kR⊥ ρ3i ≫ 1, k2⊥ ρe ≪ 1) and for electrons
(when
k
ρ
≫
1),
reduce
to
lowest
order
to
the
statement
of
3D
conservation
of
d v d Ri T0i hi /2F0i [Wh in Eq. (222)] and
R 3 R ⊥3 e
d v d Re T0e h2e /2F0e [Eq. (257)], respectively.
2 2
k⊥
ρs /2

F.6. Implications for Turbulent Cascades and Scalings
Since invariants other than the generalized energy or its constituent parts are present in 2D and, in some limits, also in 3D, one
might ask how their presence affects the turbulent cascades and scalings. As an example, let us consider the magnetic helicity in
KAW turbulence, which is a 3D invariant of the ERMHD equations (§ F.3).
A Kolmogorov-style analysis of a local KAW cascade based on a constant flux of helicity gives (proceeding as in § 7.4):

p
λ Φ2λ
Φ3
Ψ λ Φλ p
∼ 1 + βi
∼ 1 + βi λ ∼ εH = const
τKAWλ
ρi τKAWλ
ρi λ

εH
1/3
(F11)
ρ λ1/3 ,
(1 + βi)1/6 i
R
where εH is the helicity flux (omitting constant dimensional factors, the helicity is now defined as d 3 r ΨΦ and assumed to
−5/3
be non-zero). This corresponds to a k⊥ spectrum of magnetic energy. In order to decide whether we expect the scalings to
be determined by the constant-helicity flux or by the constant-energy flux (as assumed in § 7.4), we adapt a standard argument
originally due to Fjørtoft (1953). If the helicity flux of the KAW turbulence originating at the ion gyroscale (via partial conversion
from the inertial-range turbulence; see § 7) is εH , its energy flux is εKAW ∼ εH [set λ = ρi in Eq. (F11) and compare with Eq. (218)].
If the cascade between the ion and electron gyroscales is controlled by maintaining a constant flux of helicity, then the helicity
flux arriving to the electron gyroscale is still εH , while the associated energy flux is εH ρi /ρe ≫ εKAW , i.e., more energy arrives to
ρe than there was at ρi ! This is clearly impossible in a stationary state. The way to resolve this contradiction is to conclude that
the helicity cascade is, in fact, inverse (i.e., directed towards larger scales), while the energy cascade is direct (to smaller scales).
⇒

Φλ ∼

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

57

A similar argument based on the constancy of the energy flux εKAW then leads to the conclusion that the helicity flux arriving
to the electron gyroscale is εKAW ρe /ρi ≪ εH ∼ εKAW , i.e., the helicity indeed does not cascade to smaller scales. It does not, in
fact, cascade to large scales either because the ERMHD equations are not valid above the ion gyroscale and the helicity of the
perturbed magnetic field in the inertial range is not a 3D invariant (§ F.4). The situation would be different if an energy source
existed either at the electron gyroscale or somewhere in between ρe and ρi . In such a case, one would expect an inverse helicity
cascade and the consequent shallower scaling [Eq. (F11)] between the energy-injection scale and the ion gyroscale.
Other invariants introduced above can in a similar fashion be argued to give rise to inverse cascades in the hypothetical 2D
situations where they are valid and provided there is energy injection at small scales. The view of turbulence advanced in this
paper does not generally allow for this to happen. First, the fundamentally 3D nature of the turbulence is imposed via the critical
balance conjecture and supported by the argument that "twodimensionality" can only be maintained across parallel distances that
do not exceed the distance a parallel-propagating wave (or parallel-streaming particles) travels over one nonlinear decorrelation
time (see § 1.2, § 7.4 and § 7.7.3). Secondly, the lack of small-scale energy injection was assumed at the outset. This can, however,
be violated in real astrophysical plasmas by various small-scale plasma instabilities (e.g., triggered by pressure anisotropies; see
discussion in § 8.1.6). Treatment of such effects falls outside the scope of this paper and remains a matter for future work.
REFERENCES
Abel, I. G., Barnes, M. A., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., & Schekochihin,
A. A. 2008, Phys. Plasmas, submitted
Alexandrova, O. 2008, Nonlin. Processes Geophys., 15, 95
Alexandrova, O., Carbone, V., Veltri, P., & Sorriso-Valvo, L. 2008, ApJ, 674,
1153
Antonsen, T. M. & Lane, B. 1980, Phys. Fluids, 23, 1205
Armstrong, J. W., Cordes, J. M., & Rickett, B. J. 1981, Nature, 291, 561
Armstrong, J. W., Rickett, B. J., & Spangler, S. R. 1995, ApJ, 443, 209
Armstrong, J. W., Coles, W. A., Kojima, M., & Rickett, B. J. 1990, ApJ,
358, 685
Artun, M. & Tang, W. M. 1994, Phys. Plasmas, 1, 2682
Balbus, S. A. & Hawley, J. F. 1998, Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 1
Bale, S. D., Kellogg, P. J., Mozer, F. S., Horbury, T. S., & Reme, H. 2005,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 94, 215002
Barnes, A. 1966, Phys. Fluids, 9, 1483
Barnes, M. A., Abel, I. G., Dorland, W., Schekochihin, A. A., & Tatsuno, T.
2008, Phys. Plasmas, submitted
Bavassano, B., Dobrowolny, M., Fanfoni, G., Mariani, F., & Ness, N. F.
1982, J. Geophys. Res., 87, 3617
Bavassano, B., Pietropaolo, E., & Bruno, R. 2004, Ann. Geophys., 22, 689
Beck, R. 2006, in Polarisation 2005, ed. F. Boulanger &
M. A. Miville-Deschenes, EAS Pub. Ser., in press (astro-ph/0603531)
Belcher, J. W. & Davis, L. 1971, J. Geophys. Res., 76, 3534
Beresnyak, A. & Lazarian, A. 2006, ApJ, 640, L175
Beresnyak, A. & Lazarian, A. 2007, arXiv:0709.0554
Berger, M. 1997, J. Geophys. Res., 102, 2637
Bershadskii, A. & Sreenivasan, K. R. 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett., 93, 064501
Bhattacharjee, A. & Ng, C. S. 2001, ApJ, 548, 318
Bhattacharjee, A., Ng, C. S., Spangler, S. R. 1998, ApJ, 494, 409
Bieber, J. W., Wanner, W., & Matthaeus, W. H. 1996, J. Geophys. Res., 101,
2511
Bigazzi, A., Biferale, L., Gama, S. M. A., & Velli, M. 2006, ApJ, 638, 499
Biskamp, D. & Müller, W.-C. 2000, Phys. Plasmas, 7, 4889
Biskamp, D., Schwartz, E., & Drake, J. F. 1996, Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 1264
Biskamp, D., Schwartz, E., Zeiler, A., Celani, A., & Drake, J. F. 1999, Phys.
Plasmas, 6, 751
Boldyrev, S. A. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 115002
Borovsky, J. E. & Funsten, H. O., J. Geophys. Res., 108, 1284
Braginskii, S. I. 1965, Rev. Plasma Phys., 1, 205
Brandenburg, A. & Matthaeus, W. H. 2004, Phys. Rev. E, 69, 056407
Brizard, A. J. & Hahm, T. S. 2007, Rev. Mod. Phys., 79, 421
Brunetti, G. & Lazarian, A. 2007, MNRAS, 378, 245
Bruno, R. & Carbone, V. 2005, Living Rev. Solar Phys., 2, 4
Bruno, R., Carbone, V., Chapman, S., Hnat, B., Noullez, A., &
Sorriso-Valvo, L. 2007, Phys. Plasmas, 14, 032901
Burlaga, L. F., Scudder, J. D., Klein, L. W., & Isenburg, P. A. 1990, J.
Geophys. Res., 95, 2229
Candy, J. & Waltz, R. E. 2003, J. Comp. Phys., 186, 545
Carter, T. A., Brugman, B., Pribyl, P., & Lybarger, W. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
96, 155001
Catto, P. J. 1978, Plasma Phys., 20, 719
Catto, P. J. & Tsang, K. T. 1977, Phys. Fluids, 20, 396
Catto, P. J., Tang, W. M., & Baldwin, D. E. 1981, Plasma Phys., 23, 639
Celnikier, L. M., Harvey, C. C., Jegou, R., Kemp, M., & Moricet, P. 1983,
A&A, 126, 293
Celnikier, L. M., Muschietti, L., & Goldman, M. V. 1987, A&A, 181, 138
Chandran, B. D. G. 2005a, ApJ, 632, 809

Chandran, B. D. G. 2005b, Phys. Rev. Lett., 95, 265004
Chandran, B. D. G. 2008, ApJ, in press (arXiv:0801.4903)
Chapman, S. & Cowling, T. G. 1970, The Mathematical Theory of
Non-Uniform Gases (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press)
Chen, Y. & Parker, S. E. 2003, J. Comp. Phys., 189, 463
Cho, J. & Lazarian, A. 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 245001
Cho, J. & Lazarian, A. 2003, MNRAS, 345, 325
Cho, J. & Lazarian, A. 2004, ApJ, 615, L41
Cho, J. & Vishniac, E. T. 2000, ApJ, 539, 273
Cho, J., Lazarian, A., & Vishniac, E. T. 2002, ApJ, 564, 291
Cho, J., Lazarian, A., & Vishniac, E. T. 2002, ApJ, 595, 812
Clarke, T. E. & Ensslin T. A. 2006, AJ, 131, 2900
Coleman, P. J. 1968, ApJ, 153, 371
Coles, W. A. & Harmon, J. K. 1989, ApJ, 337, 1023
Coles, W. A., Liu, W., Harmon, J. K., & Martin, C. L. 1991, J. Geophys.
Res., 96, 1745
Coroniti, F. W., Kennel, C. F., Scarf, F. L., & Smith, E. J. 1982, J. Geophys.
Res., 87, 6029
Corrsin, S. 1951, J. Applied Phys., 22, 469
Cowley, S. C. 1985, Ph. D. Thesis (Princeton University)
Cranmer, S. R. & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2003, ApJ, 594, 573
Dasso, S., Milano, L. J., Matthaeus, W. H., & Smith, C. W. 2005, ApJ, 635,
L181
Dennett-Thorpe, J. & de Bruyn, A. G. 2003, A&A, 404, 113
Denskat, K. U., Beinroth, H. J., & Neubauer, F. M. 1983, J. Geophys., 54, 60
Dimits, A. M. & Cohen, B. I. 1994, Phys. Rev. E, 49, 709
Dmitruk, P., Gomez, D. O., & Matthaeus, W. H. 2003, Phys. Plasmas, 10,
3584
Dobrowolny, M., Mangeney, A., & Veltri, P.-L. 1980, Phys. Rev. Lett., 45,
144
Dorland, W. & Hammett, G. W. 1993, Phys. Fluids B, 5, 812
Dubin, D. H. E., Krommes, J. A., Oberman, C., & Lee, W. W. 1983, Phys.
Fluids, 26, 3524
Elsasser, W. M. 1950, Phys. Rev., 79, 183
Ensslin, T. A. & Vogt, C. 2006, A&A, 453, 447
Ensslin, T. A., Waelkens, A., Vogt, C., & Schekochihin, A. A. 2006, Astron.
Nachr., 327, 626
Fabian, A. C., Sanders, J. S., Taylor, G. B., Allen, S. W., Crawford, C. S.,
Johnstone, R. M., & Iwasawa, K. 2006, MNRAS, 366, 417
Ferriere, K. M. 2001, Rev. Mod. Phys., 73, 1031
Fitzpatrick, R. & Porcelli, F. 2004, Phys. Plasmas, 11, 4713
Fjørtoft, R. 1953, Tellus, 5, 225
Foote, E. A. & Kulsrud, R. M. 1979, ApJ, 233, 302
Fried, B. D. & Conte, S. D. 1961, The Plasma Dispersion Function (San
Diego: Academic Press)
Frieman, E. A. & Chen, L. 1982, Phys. Fluids, 25, 502
Fyfe, D., Joyce, G., & Montgomery, D. 1977, J. Plasma Phys., 17, 317
Galtier, S. 2006, J. Plasma Phys., 72, 721
Galtier, S. & Bhattacharjee, A. 2003, Phys. Plasmas, 10, 3065
Galtier, S. & Buchlin, E. 2007, ApJ, 656, 560
Galtier, S. & Chandran, B. D. G. 2006, Phys. Plasmas, 13, 114505
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Newell, A. C., & Pouquet, A. 2000, J. Plasma
Phys., 63, 447
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Newell, A. C., & Pouquet, A. 2002, ApJ, 564,
L49
Gary, S. P., Montgomery, M. D., Feldman, W. C., & Forslund, D. W. 1976,
J. Geophys. Res., 81, 1241

58

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

Gary, S. P., Skoug, R. M., Steinberg, J. T., & Smith, C. W. 2001, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 28, 2759
Gogoberidze, G. 2005, Phys. Rev. E, 72, 046407
Gogoberidze, G. 2007, Phys. Plasmas, 14, 022304
Goldreich, P. & Reisenegger, A. 1992, ApJ, 395, 250
Goldreich, P. & Sridhar, S. 1995, ApJ, 438, 763
Goldreich, P. & Sridhar, S. 1997, ApJ, 485, 680
Gosh, S., Siregar, E., Roberts, D. A., & Goldstein, M. L. 1996,
J. Geophys. Res., 101, 2493
Goswami, P., Passot, T., & Sulem, P. L. 2005, Phys. Plasmas, 12, 102109
Grall, R. R., Coles, W. A., Spangler, S. R., Sakurai, T., & Harmon, J. K.
1997, J. Geophys. Res., 102, 263
Grison, B., Sahraoui, F., Lavraud, B., Chust, T., Cornilleau-Wehrlin, N.,
Rème, H., Balogh, A., & André, M. 2005, Ann. Geophys., 23, 3699
Hahm, T. S., Lee, W. W., & Brizard, A. 1988, Phys. Fluids, 31, 1940
Hallatschek, K. 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett., 93, 125001
Hamilton, K., Smith, C. W., Vasquez, B. J., & Leamon, R. J. 2008,
J. Geophys. Res., 113, A01106
Hammett, G. W., Dorland, W., & Perkins, F. W. 1991, Phys. Fluids B, 4,
2052
Haugen, N. E. L., Brandenburg, A., & Dobler, W. 2004, Phys. Rev. E, 70,
016308
Haverkorn, M., Gaensler, B. M., McClure-Griffiths, N. M., Dickey, J. M., &
Green, A. J. 2004, ApJ, 609, 776
Haverkorn, M., Gaensler, B. M., Brown, J. C., Bizunok, N. S.,
McClure-Griffiths, N. M., Dickey, J. M., & Green, A. J. 2005, ApJ, 637,
L33
Haverkorn, M., Brown, J. C., Gaensler, B. M., & McClure-Griffiths, N. M.
2008, ApJ, submitted (arXiv:0802.2740)
Hazeltine, R. D. 1983, Phys. Fluids, 26, 3242
Hazeltine, R. D., Hsu, C. T., & Morrison, P. J. 1987, Phys. Fluids, 30, 3204
Helander, P. & Sigmar, D. J. 2002, Collisional Transport in Magnetized
Plasmas (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press)
Hellinger, P., Trávnícek, P., Kasper, J. C., & Lazarus, A. J., 2006, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 33, L09101
Heyer, M., Gong, H., Ostriker, E., & Brunt, C. 2008, arXiv:0802.2084
Higdon, J. C. 1984, ApJ, 285, 109
Hirose, A., Ito, A., Mahajan, S. M., & Ohsaki, S. 2004, Phys. Lett. A, 330,
474
Hnat, B., Chapman, S. C., & Rowlands, G. 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett., 94,
204502
Hnat, B., Chapman, S. C., Kiyani, K., Rowlands, G., & Watkins, N. W.
2007, Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L15108
Horbury, T. S., Balogh, A., Forsyth, R. J., & Smith E. J. 1996, A&A, 316,
333
Horbury, T. S., Forman, M. A., & Oughton, S. 2005, Plasma Phys. Control.
Fusion, 47, B703
Horbury, T. S., Forman, M. A., & Oughton, S. 2008, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
submitted
Howes, G. G., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E., &
Schekochihin, A. A. 2006, ApJ, 651, 590
Howes, G. G., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E., &
Schekochihin, A. A., 2008a, J. Geophys. Res., 113, A05103
Howes, G. G., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E.,
Schekochihin, A. A., & Tatsuno, T. 2008b, Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 065004
Iroshnikov, R. S. 1963, Astron. Zh., 40, 742 [English translation: Sov.
Astron, 7, 566 (1964)]
Ito, A., Hirose, A., Mahajan, S. M., & Ohsaki, S. 2004, Phys. Plasmas, 11,
5643
Jenko, F., Dorland, W., Kotschenreuther, M., & Rogers, B. N. 2000, Phys.
Plasmas, 7, 1904
Kadomtsev, B. B. & Pogutse, O. P. 1974, Sov. Phys. JETP, 38, 283
Kasper, J. C., Lazarus, A. J., & Gary, S. P. 2002, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 20
Kellogg, P. J. & Horbury, T. S. 2005, Annales Geophysicae, 23, 3765
Kellogg, P. J., Bale, S. D., Mozer, F. S., Horbury, T. S., & Reme, H. 2006,
ApJ, 645, 704
Kingsep, A. S., Chukbar, K. V., & Yankov, V. V. 1990, Rev. Plasma Phys.,
16, 243
Kinney, R. & McWilliams, J. C., 1997, J. Plasma Phys., 57, 73
Kinney, R. M. & McWilliams, J. C. 1998, Phys. Rev. E, 57, 7111
Kivelson, M. G. & Southwood, D. J. 1996, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 17365
Kiyani, K., Chapman, S. C., Hnat, B. & Nicol, R. M. 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
98, 211101
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1941, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 30, 299 [English
translation: Proc. Roy. Soc. London A, 434, 9 (1991)]
Kotschenreuther, M., Rewoldt, G., & Tang, W. M. 1995, Comp. Phys.
Comm., 88, 128

Kraichnan, R. H. 1965, Phys. Fluids, 8, 1385
Krishan, V. & Mahajan, S. M. 2004, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A11105
Krommes, J. A. 1999, Phys. Plasmas, 6, 1477
Krommes, J. A. 2006, in Turbulence and Coherent Structures in Fluids,
Plasmas and Nonlinear Medium, eds. M. Shats & H. Punzmann
(Singapore: World Scientific), in press
Krommes, J. A. & Hu, G. 1994, Phys. Plasmas, 1, 3211
Kruger, S. E., Hegna, C. C., & Callen, J. D. 1998, Phys. Plasmas, 5, 4169
Kulsrud, R. M. 1964, in Teoria dei plasmi, ed. M. N. Rosenbluth (London:
Academic Press), 54
Kulsrud, R. M. 1983, in Handbook of Plasma Physics, Vol. 1, ed.
A. A. Galeev & R. N. Sudan (Amsterdam: North–Holland), 115
Lacombe, C., Samsonov, A. A., Mangeney, A., Maksimovic, M.,
Cornilleau-Wehrlin, N., Harvey, C. C., Bosqued, J.-M., & Trávnícek, P.
2006, Ann. Geophys., 24, 3523
Landau, L. 1936, Zh. Exp. Teor. Fiz., 7, 203
Lazio, T. J. W., Cordes, J. M., de Bruyn, A. G., & Macquart, J.-P. 2004, New
Astron. Rev., 48, 1439
Leamon, R. J., Smith, C. W., Ness, N. F., Matthaeus, W. H., & Wong, H. K.
1998, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 4775
Leamon, R. J., Smith, C. W., Ness, N. F., & Wong, H. K. 1998, J. Geophys.
Res., 104, 22331
Leamon, R. J., Matthaeus, W. H., Smith, C. W., Zank, G. P., & Mullan, D. J.
2000, ApJ, 537, 1054
Lithwick, Y. & Goldreich, P. 2001, ApJ, 562, 279
Lithwick, Y. & Goldreich, P. 2003, ApJ, 582, 1220
Lithwick, Y., Goldreich, P., & Sridhar, S. 2006, ApJ, 655, 269
Loeb, A. & Waxman, E. 2007, JCAP, 03, 011
Longmire, C. L. 1963, Elementary Plasma Physics (New York: Interscience)
Lovelace, R. V. E., Salpeter, E. E., Sharp, L. E., & Harris, D. E. 1970, ApJ,
159
Mahajan, S. M. & Krishan, V. 2005, MNRAS, 359, L27
Mahajan, S. M. & Yoshida, Z. 1998, Phys. Rev. Lett., 81, 4863
Maksimovic, M., Zouganelis, I., Chaufray, J.-Y., Issautier, K., Scime, E. E.,
Littleton, J. E., Marsch, E., McComas, D. J., Salem, C., Lin, R. P., &
Elliott, H. 2005, J. Geophys. Res., 110, A09104
Mangeney, A., Lacombe, C., Maksimovic, M., Samsonov, A. A.,
Cornilleau-Wehrlin, N., Harvey, C. C., Bosqued, J.-M., & Trávnícek, P.
2006, Ann. Geophys., 24, 3507
Markevitch, M. & Vikhlinin, A. 2007, Phys. Rep., submitted
Markevitch, M., Mazzotta, P., Vikhlinin, A., Burke, D., Butt, Y., David, L.,
Donnelly, H., Forman, W. R., Harris, D., Kin, D.-W., Virani, S., &
Vrtilek, J. 2003, ApJ, 586, L19
Markovskii, S. A., Vasquez, B. J., & Smith, C. W. 2008, ApJ, 675, 1576
Maron, J. & Goldreich, P. 2001, ApJ, 554, 1175
Marsch, E. 2006, Living Rev. Solar Phys., 3, 1
Marsch, E. & Tu, C.-Y. 1990a, J. Gephys. Res, 95, 8211
Marsch, E. & Tu, C.-Y. 1990b, J. Gephys. Res, 95, 11945
Marsch, E. & Tu, C.-Y. 1993, Ann. Geophys., 11, 659
Marsch, E., Ao, X.-Z.,& Tu, C.-Y. 2004, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A04102
Mason, J., Cattaneo, F., & Boldyrev, S. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett., 97, 255002
Mason, J., Cattaneo, F., & Boldyrev, S. 2007, submitted (arXiv:0706.2003)
Matteini, L., Landi, S., Hellinger, P., Pantellini, F., Maksimovic, M., Velli,
M., Goldstein, B. E., & Marsch, E. 2007, Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L20105
Matthaeus, W. H. & Goldstein, M. L. 1982, J. Geophys. Res., 87, 6011
Matthaeus, W. H. & Brown, M. R. 1988, Phys. Fluids, 31, 3634
Matthaeus, W. H., Goldstein, M. L., & Roberts, D. A. 1990, J. Geophys.
Res., 95, 20673
Matthaeus, W. H., Klein, K. W., Ghosh, S., & Brown, M. R. 1991,
J. Geophys. Res., 96, 5421
Matthaeus, W. H., Pouquet, A., Mininni, P. D., Dmitruk, P., & Breech, B.
2008, Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 085003
Minter, A. H. & Spangler, S. R. 1996, ApJ, 458, 194
Montgomery, D. C. 1982, Phys. Scripta, T2/1, 83
Montgomery, D. C. & Bates, J. W. 1999, Phys. Plasmas, 6, 2727
Montgomery, D. & Turner, L. 1981, Phys. Fluids, 24, 825
Montgomery, D., Brown, M. R., & Matthaeus, W. H. 1987, J. Geophys.
Res., 92, 282
Morales, G. J., Maggs, J. E., Burke, A. T., & Peñano, J. R. 1999, Plasma
Phys. Control. Fusion, 41, A519
Müller, W.-C., Biskamp, D., & Grappin, R. 2003, Phys. Rev. E, 67, 066302
Narayan, R. & Quataert, E. 2005, Science, 307, 77
Narayan, R. & Yi, I. 1995, ApJ, 452, 710
Narita, Y., Glassmeier, K.-H., & Treumann, R. A. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett., 97,
191101
Newbury, J. A., Russell, C. T., Phillips, J. L., & Gary, S. P. 1998,
J. Geophys. Res., 103, 9553

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
Ng, C. S. & Bhattacharjee, A. 1996, ApJ, 465, 845
Ng, C. S. & Bhattacharjee, A. 1997, Phys. Plasmas, 4, 605
Ng, C. S., Bhattacharjee, A., Germaschewski, K., & Galtier, S. 2003, Phys.
Plasmas, 10, 1954
Norman, C. A. & Ferrara, A. 1996, ApJ, 467, 280
Obukhov, A. M. 1941, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Geogr. Geofiz., 5, 453
Obukhov, A. M. 1949, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Geogr. Geofiz., 13, 58
Osman, K. T. & Horbury, T. S. 2007, 654, L103
Oughton, S., Dmitruk, P., & Matthaeus, W. H. 2004, Phys. Plasmas, 11, 2214
Oughton, S., Priest, E. R., & Matthaeus, W. H. 1994, J. Fluid Mech., 280, 95
Passot, T. & Sulem, P. L. 2007, Phys. Plasmas, submitted
Perez, J. C. & Boldyrev, S. 2008, ApJ, 672, L61
Petrukovich, A. A. 2005, in Non-equilubrium Phenomena in Plasmas, ed.
A. S. Sharma & P. K. Kaw (Berlin: Springer), 145
Plunk, G. G. 2008, Ph. D. Thesis, UCLA
Podesta, J. J., Roberts, D. A., & Goldstein, M. L. 2006, J. Geophys. Res.,
111, A10109
Quataert, E. 2003, Astron. Nachr., 324, 435
Quataert, E. & Gruzinov, A. 1999, ApJ, 520, 248
Quataert, E., Dorland, W., & Hammett, G. W. 2002, ApJ, 577, 524
Ramos, J. J. 2005, Phys. Plasmas, 12, 052102
Rappazzo, A. F., Velli, M., Einaudi, G., & Dahlburg, R. B. 2007, ApJ, 657,
L47
Rappazzo, A. F., Velli, M., Einaudi, G., & Dahlburg, R. B. 2008, ApJ,
submitted (arXiv:0709.3687)
Rees, M. J., Begelman, M. C., Blandford, R. D., & Phinney, E. S. 1982,
Nature, 295, 17
Rickett, B. J., Kedziora-Chudczer, L., & Jauncey, D. L. 2002, ApJ, 581, 103
Roberts, D. A. 1990, J. Geophys. Res., 95, 1087
Robinson, D. C. & Rusbridge, M. G. 1971, Phys. Fluids, 14, 2499
Rosenbluth, M. N., Hazeltine, R. D., & Hinton, F. L. 1972, Phys. Fluids, 15,
116
Rutherford, P. H. & Frieman, E. A. 1968, Phys. Fluids, 11, 569
Sahraoui, F., Belmont, G., Rezeau, L., Cornilleau-Wehrlin, N., Pinçon, J. L.,
& Balogh, A. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 075002
Sanders, J. S. & Fabian, A. C. 2006, MNRAS, 371, L65
Schekochihin, A. A. & Cowley, S. C. 2006, Phys. Plasmas, 13, 056501
Schekochihin, A. A. & Cowley, S. C. 2007, in Magnetohydrodynamics:
Historical Evolution and Trends, ed. S. Molokov, R. Moreau, &
H. K. Moffatt, (Berlin: Springer), 85 (astro-ph/0507686)
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Taylor, S. F., Maron, J. L., &
McWilliams, J. C. 2004, ApJ, 612, 276
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Kulsrud, R. M., Hammett, G. W., &
Sharma, P. 2005, ApJ, 629, 139
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., & Dorland, W. 2007, Plasma Phys.
Control. Fusion, 49, A195
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Kulsrud, R. M., Rosin, M. S., &
Heinemann, T. 2008a, Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 081301
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., Plunk, G., Tatsuno, T.
2008b, Phys. Rev. Lett., submitted
Schuecker, P., Finoguenov, A., Miniati, F., Böhringer, H., & Briel, U. G.
2004, A&A, 426, 387

59

Scott, B. D. 2007, Phys. Plasmas, submitted (arXiv:0710.4899)
Shakura, N. I. & Sunyaeve, R. A. 1973, A&A, 24, 337
Sharma, P., Hammett, G. W., & Quataert, E. 2003, ApJ, 596, 1121
Sharma, P., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E., & Stone, J. M. 2006, ApJ, 637,
952
Sharma, P., Quataert, E., Hammett, G. W., & Stone, J. M. 2007, ApJ, 667,
714
Shebalin, J. V., Matthaeus, W. H., & Montgomery, D. 1983, J. Plasma Phys.,
29, 525
Shukurov, A. 2007, in Mathematical Aspects of Natural Dynamos, eds.
E. Dormy & A. M. Soward (London: CRC Press) (astro-ph/0411739)
Smirnova, T. V., Gwinn, C. R., & Shishov, V. I. 2006, A&A, 453, 601
Smith, C. W., Mullan, D. J., Ness, N. F., Skoug, R. M., & Steinberg, J. 2001,
J. Geophys. Res., 106, 18625
Smith, C. W., Hamilton, K., Vasquez, B. J., & Leamon, R. J. 2006, ApJ, 645,
L85
Snyder, P. B. & Hammett, G. W. 2001, Phys. Plasmas, 8, 3199
Snyder, P. B., Hammett, G. W., & Dorland, W. 1997, Phys. Plasmas, 4, 3974
Sorriso-Valvo, L., Carbone, V., Bruno, R., & Veltri, P. 2006, Europhys. Lett.,
75, 832
Spangler, S. R. & Gwinn, C. R. 1990, ApJ, 353, L29
Stawicki, O., Gary, S. P., & Li, H. 2001, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 8273
Strauss, H. R. 1976, Phys. Fluids, 19, 134
Strauss, H. R. 1977, Phys. Fluids, 20, 1354
Stribling, T., Matthaeus, W. H., & Ghosh, S. 1994, J. Geopjys. Res., 99,
2567
Subramanian, K., Shukurov, A., & Haugen, N. E. L. 2006, MNRAS, 366,
1437
Sugama, H. & Horton, W. 1997, Phys. Plasmas, 4, 405
Sugama, H., Okamoto, M., Horton, W., & Wakatani, M. 1996, Phys.
Plasmas, 3, 2379
Tatsuno, T., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., Plunk, G., & Schekochihin, A. A.
2008, Phys. Rev. Lett., submitted
Taylor, G. I. 1938, Proc. R. Soc. A, 164, 476
Taylor, J. B. & Hastie, R. J. 1968, Plasma Phys., 10, 479
Trotter, A. S., Moran, J. M., & Rodríguez, L. F. 1998, ApJ, 493, 666
Tu, C.-Y. & Marsch, E. 1995, Space Sci. Rev., 73, 1
Vogt, C. & Ensslin, T. A. 2005, A&A, 434, 67
Voitenko, Yu. M. 1998, J. Plasma Phys., 60, 515
Watanabe, T.-H. & Sugama, H. 2004, Phys. Plasmas, 11, 1476
Wicks, R. T., Chapman, S. C., & Dendy, R. O. 2007, submitted
(arXiv:0711.4814)
Wilkinson, P. N., Narayan, R., & Spencer, R. E. 1994, MNRAS, 269, 67
Woo, R. & Armstrong, S. R. 1979, J. Geophys. Res., 84, 7288
Woo, R. & Habbal, S. R. 1997, ApJ, 474, L139
Yousef, T., Rincon, F., & Schekochihin, A. 2007, J. Fluid Mech., 575, 111
Zank, G. P. & Matthaeus, W. H., 1992, J. Plasma Phys., 48, 85
Zank, G. P. & Matthaeus, W. H., 1993, Phys. Fluids A, 5, 257
Zweben, S. J., Menyuk, C. R. & Taylor, R. J., 1979, Phys. Rev. Lett.,42,
1270

