T HE A STROPHYSICAL J OURNAL S UPPLEMENT S ERIES , submitted
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 03/07/07

KINETIC AND FLUID TURBULENT CASCADES IN MAGNETIZED WEAKLY COLLISIONAL ASTROPHYSICAL
PLASMAS
A. A. S CHEKOCHIHIN , 1,2 S. C. C OWLEY, 1,3 W. D ORLAND , 4 G. W. H AMMETT, 5 G. G. H OWES , 6 E. Q UATAERT, 6

AND

T. TATSUNO 4

arXiv:0704.0044v1 [astro-ph] 31 Mar 2007

DRAFT VERSION June 29, 2013

ABSTRACT
This paper presents a theoretical framework for understanding plasma turbulence in astrophysical plasmas. It
is motivated by observations of electromagnetic and density fluctuations in the solar wind, interstellar medium
and galaxy clusters, as well as by models of particle heating in accretion disks. All of these plasmas and
many others have turbulent motions at weakly collisional and collisionless scales. This paper focuses on
turbulence in a strong mean magnetic field (the guide field). The key assumptions behind the theory developed
here are that the turbulent fluctuations are anisotropic with respect to the mean field and that their frequency
is low compared to the ion cyclotron frequency. The turbulence is assumed to be stirred (forced) at some
system-specific outer scale L. The energy injected at this scale has to be dissipated into heat, which ultimately
cannot be accomplished without collisions. A kinetic cascade develops that brings the energy to collisional
scales both in space and velocity. The nature of the kinetic cascade in various scale ranges depends on the
physics of plasma fluctuations that can exist there. There are four special scales that separate physically distinct
regimes: the electron gyroscale ρe , the ion gyroscale ρi , the mean free path λmfpi and the electron heat diffusion
scale (mi /me )1/2 λmfpi (me and mi are electron and ion masses). In each of the scale ranges separated by these
scales, a number of physically meaningful and rigorously justifiable simplifications of the fully kinetic plasma
description are possible. These are derived systematically via a hierarchy of asymptotic expansions. The
result is that, in each scale range, the fully kinetic problem is reduced to a more physically transparent and
computationally tractable system of equations, which are derived in a rigorous way. In the "inertial range"
above the ion gyroscale, the kinetic cascade separates into two parts: a cascade of Alfvénic fluctuations and a
passive cascade of density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations. The former are governed by two fluid-like
Reduced Magnetohydrodynamic (RMHD) equations at both the collisional and collisionless scales; the latter
obey a linear kinetic equation along the (moving) field lines associated with the Alfvénic component (in the
collisional limit, these passive fluctuations become the slow and entropy modes of the conventional MHD). In
the "dissipation range" between the ion and electron gyroscales, there are again two cascades: the kineticAlfvén-wave (KAW) cascade governed by two fluid-like Electron Reduced Magnetohydrodynamic (ERMHD)
equations and a passive cascade of ion entropy fluctuations both in space and velocity. The latter cascade brings
the energy of the inertial-range fluctuations that was damped by collisionless wave-particle interaction at the
ion gyroscle to collisional scales and leads to ion heating. The KAW energy is similarly damped at the electron
gyroscale and is converted into electron heat. The relationship between the theoretical models proposed in this
paper and astrophysical applications and observations is discussed in detail.
Subject headings: magnetic fields-methods: analytical-MHD-plasmas-turbulence
1. INTRODUCTION

As observations of velocity, density and magnetic fields in
astrophysical plasmas probe ever smaller scales, turbulence-
i.e., broad-band disordered fluctuations usually characterized
by power-law energy spectra-is revealed as a fundamental
and ubiquitous feature. A property that has recurred in these
measurements so frequently that it is sometimes (erroneously)
thought of as synonymous with turbulence is the k−5/3 energy
spectrum, known as the Kolmogorov spectrum.
One of the earliest appearances of this spectrum in the astrophysical context was its detection for the magnetic flucElectronic address: a.schekochihin@imperial.ac.uk
1 Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, London SW7 2BW, UK.
2 King's College, Cambridge CB2 1ST, UK.
3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1547.
4 Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742-3511.
5 Princeton University Plasma Physics Laboratory, P. O. Box 451, Princeton, NJ 08543.
6 Department of Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720.

tuations in the solar wind over a frequency range of about
two decades (Matthaeus & Goldstein 1982; Bavassano et al.
1982). A multitude of subsequent observations have confirmed this behaviour of the magnetic fluctuations to a high
degree of accuracy (e.g., Horbury et al. 1996; Leamon et al.
1998; Narita et al. 2006). It has also been found that the spectrum of the fluctuations of the electric field (and, by implication, of the E × B velocity field) follows very closely the
spectrum of magnetic fluctuations (Bale et al. 2005).
The Kolmogorov power law appears also to hold for the
electron density spectrum in the interstellar medium (ISM)-
in this case it emerges from observations by various methods
and famously extends over as many as 10 decades of scales
(Armstrong et al. 1995; Lazio et al. 2004), a record that has
earned it the name of "the Great Power Law in the Sky." Magnetic fluctuations observed in the ISM appear to have a Kolmogorov spectrum as well, similar to that of the density fluctuations (Minter & Spangler 1996; Haverkorn et al. 2004). In
galaxy clusters, analysis of pressure maps reveals a spectrum
that may be consistent with Kolmogorov's, though still suffers
from poor resolution (Schuecker et al. 2004); magnetic fluctuations in cluster cores were also recently discovered to have

2

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

a spectrum consistent with k−5/3 (Vogt & Ensslin 2005).
1.1. Kolmogorov and Goldreich–Sridhar Turbulence

It is perhaps useful to remind the reader of the argument that
leads to the k−5/3 spectrum (Kolmogorov 1941). Suppose the
average energy per unit time per unit volume that the system
dissipates is ε. This energy has to be transferred from some
(large) outer scale L at which it is injected to some (small)
inner scale(s) at which dissipation occurs (see § 1.3). It is
assumed that in the range of scales intermediate between the
outer and the inner, the statistical properties of the turbulence
are spatially homogeneous and isotropic and the energy transfer is local in scale space. If we are dealing with a neutral
incompressible fluid, its properties are fully described by the
velocity field. The flux of kinetic energy through scale λ is
independent of λ:
u2λ
∼ ε = const,
(1)
τλ
where the (constant) density of the medium is absorbed into ε,
uλ is the typical velocity fluctuation associated with the scale
λ, and τλ is the cascade time. (this is the version of Kolmogorov's dimensional theory due to Obukhov 1941). It is
dimensionally inevitable that if τλ is to be expressed in terms
of quantities associated with scale λ, it has to be τλ ∼ λ/uλ
(the nonlinear interaction time, or turnover time), so we get
uλ ∼ (ελ)1/3 .
(2)
−5/3
This corresponds to a k
spectrum of kinetic energy.
That astronomical data appears to point to a universal nature of what, in its origin, is a dimensional result for a turbulent energy cascade in a neutral fluid, might appear surprising. Indeed, the astrophysical plasmas in question are highly
conducting and support magnetic fields whose energy is at
least comparable to the kinetic energy of the motions. In the
presence of magnetic field there is no dimensionally unique
way of determining the cascade time τλ because besides the
nonlinear interaction time λ/uλ , there is a second characteristic time associated with the fluctuation of size λ, namely the
Alfvén time lkλ /vA , where vA is the Alfvén speed and lkλ is
the typical scale of the fluctuation along the magnetic field.
Until the mid-1990s, the accepted view of this magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence was the theory of Iroshnikov
(1963) and Kraichnan (1965), who calculated τλ by assuming an isotropic cascade of weakly interacting Alfvén-wave
packets and obtained a k−3/2 spectrum. The failure of the observed spectra to conform to this law was a source of some
puzzlement.
The observed k−5/3 spectra for cosmic plasmas only started
to make sense when Goldreich & Sridhar (1995, henceforth,
GS) removed the isotropy assumption from the theory of
Alfvén-wave turbulence and conjectured instead that, in the
presence of a dynamically strong background magnetic field
(the mean, or guide, field),7 (a) all electromagnetic perturbations are strongly anisotropic, so that the characteristic wave
numbers along the mean field are much smaller than those
across it, kk ≪ k⊥ , or lkλ ≫ λ; (b) the interactions between
the Alfvén-wave packets are strong and the turbulence at sufficiently small scales always arranges itself in such a way that
the Alfvén time scale and the perpendicular nonlinear interaction time scale are comparable to each other, i.e.,
ω ∼ kk vA ∼ k⊥ u ⊥ ,
(3)
7

See § 8.2.3 for a brief discussion of the no-mean-field case.

where ω is the typical frequency of the fluctuations and u⊥
is the velocity fluctuation perpendicular to the mean field.
Physically, Eq. (3) means that two planes perpendicular to
the mean field are correlated if an Alfvén wave can propagate between them in one perpendicular decorrelation time.
Taken scale by scale, this assumption, known as the critical
balance, gives lkλ /vA ∼ λ/u⊥λ and the dimensional ambiguity of the MHD turbulence theory is removed. It is reasonable
to take the cascade time to be the same as the Alfvén time,
τλ ∼ lkλ /vA , whence
uλ ∼ (εlkλ /vA )1/2 ∼ (ελ)1/3 ,
v3A /ε.

1/3

lkλ ∼ l0 λ2/3 ,

(4)

where l0 =
The first of the scaling relations (4) is
−5/3
equivalent to a k⊥ spectrum of kinetic energy, the second quantifies the anisotropy by establishing the relation between the perpendicular and parallel scales. The fluctuations are Alfvénic, √so the typical magnetic field fluctuation is δB⊥λ ∼ u⊥λ 4πρ0 , where ρ0 is the mean density.
Other MHD modes-slow waves and entropy fluctuations-
turn out to be passively advected by the Alfvénic component of the turbulence (this follows from the anisotropy; see
Lithwick & Goldreich 2001, and § 2.3, § 2.6, § 5.5, and § 6.3
for further discussion of the passive component of MHD turbulence).
Along with the k−5/3 scaling of the spectra, the anisotropy
of astrophysical plasma turbulence is also an observed
phenomenon. It is seen most clearly in the case of
the solar wind (Belcher & Davis 1971; Matthaeus et al.
1990; Bieber et al. 1996; Dasso et al. 2005; Bigazzi et al.
2006; Sorriso-Valvo et al. 2006; Horbury et al. 2005, 2007;
Osman & Horbury 2007)-in particular, a recent solarwind data analysis by Horbury et al. (2007) approaches
quantitative corroboration of the GS theory by confirming the scaling of the spectrum with the parallel wave
number ∼ kk−2 [this follows from the first scaling relation in Eq. (4)].
Anisotropy is also observed indirectly in the ISM (Wilkinson et al. 1994; Trotter et al. 1998;
Rickett et al. 2002; Dennett-Thorpe & de Bruyn 2003) and,
with unambiguous consistency, in numerical simulations
of MHD turbulence (Shebalin et al. 1983; Cho & Vishniac
2000; Maron & Goldreich 2001; Cho et al. 2002; Müller et al.
2003).8
1.2. Kinetic Turbulence

Thus, GS have to some extent reconciled theory with data
and made sense of the MHD turbulence in highly-conducting
8 The numerical evidence is much less clear on the scaling of the
−3/2
spectrum. The fact that the spectrum appears closer to k⊥ than to
−5/3

k⊥ (Maron & Goldreich 2001; Müller et al. 2003) has prompted Boldyrev
(2006) to propose a scaling argument that allows an anisotropic Alfvénic tur−3/2
bulence with a k⊥ spectrum. His argument is based on the conjecture that
the fluctuating velocity and magnetic fields tend to partially align at small
scales, an idea that has had some numerical support (Maron & Goldreich
2001; Beresnyak & Lazarian 2006; Mason et al. 2006). The alignment weakens nonlinear interactions and alters the scalings. However, the basic assumption that the turbulence is strong is retained. This is precisely the assumption
that we make in this paper: the critical balance conjecture (3) is used below
not as a scaling prescription but in a weaker sense of an ordering assumption,
i.e., we simply take the wave propagation terms to be comparable to the nonlinear terms in the equations. It is not hard to show that the results derived in
what follows remain valid whether or not the alignment is present. We note
that observationally, only in the solar wind does one measure the spectra with
−5/3
sufficient accuracy to state that they are consistent with k⊥ but not with
−3/2

k⊥

(see § 8.1.1).

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
cosmic plasmas exhibiting the same statistical scaling as turbulence in a viscous neutral fluid (although the underlying dynamics are very different in these two cases). However, there
is an aspect of the observed astrophysical turbulence that undermines the applicability of any type of fluid description: in
most cases, the inertial range where the Kolmogorov scaling
holds extends to scales far below the mean free path deep into
the collisionless regime. For example, in the case of the solar
wind, the mean free path is close to 1 AU, so all scales are
collisionless-an extreme case, which also happens to be the
best studied, thanks to the in situ measurements (see § 8.1).
The proper way of treating such plasmas is using kinetic
theory, not fluid equations. The basis for the application of the
MHD fluid description to them has been the following well
known result from the linear theory of plasma waves: while
the fast, slow and entropy modes are damped at the meanfree-path scale both by collisional viscosity (Braginskii 1965)
and by collisionless wave-particle interactions (Barnes 1966),
the Alfvén waves are only damped at the ion gyroscale. It has,
therefore, been assumed that the MHD description, inasmuch
as it concerns the Alfvén-wave cascade, can be extended to
the ion gyroscale, with the understanding that this cascade is
decoupled from the damped cascades of the rest of the MHD
modes. This approach and its application to the turbulence in
the ISM are best explained by Lithwick & Goldreich (2001).
While the fluid description may be sufficient to understand
the Alfvénic fluctuations in the inertial range, it is certainly inadequate for everything else. The fundamental challenge that
a comprehensive theory of astrophysical plasma turbulence
must meet is to give the full account of how the turbulent fluctuation energy injected at the outer scale is cascaded to small
scales and deposited into particle heat. We shall see (§ 3.4
and § 3.5) that the familiar concept of an energy cascade can
be generalized in the kinetic framework as the kinetic cascade
of a single quantity that we call the generalized energy. The
small scales developed in the process are small scales both
in the position and velocity space. The fundamental reason
for this is the low collisionality of the plasma: since heating
cannot ultimately be accomplished without collisions, large
gradients in phase space are necessary for the collisions to be
effective.
In order to understand the physics of the kinetic cascade
in various scale ranges, we derive in what follows a hierarchy of simplified, yet rigorous kinetic, fluid and hybrid descriptions. While the full kinetic theory of turbulence is very
difficult to handle either analytically or numerically, the models we derive are much more tractable, yet rigorous. For all,
the regimes of applicability (scale/parameter ranges, underlying assumptions) are clearly articulated. In each of these
regimes, the kinetic cascade splits into several channels of energy trasfer, some of them familiar (e.g., the Alfvénic cascade,
§ 5.3 and § 5.4), others conceptually new (e.g., the entropy
cascade, §§ 7.4-7.6).
In order to introduce this theoretical framework in a way
that is both analytically systematic and physically intelligible,
let us first consider the characteristic scales that are relevant to
the problem of astrophysical turbulence (§ 1.3). The models
we derive are previewed in § 1.4, at the end of which the plan
of further developments is given.
1.3. Scales in the Problem
Outer scale. - It is a generic feature of turbulent sys-

tems that energy is injected via some large-scale mechanism: "large scale" in this context means some scale (or

3

TABLE 1
R EPRESENTATIVE PARAMETERS FOR A STROPHYSICAL P LASMAS .

Parameter

Solar
wind
at
1 AU(a)

Warm
ionized
ISM(b)

Accretion Galaxy
flow near clusters
(d)
Sgr A∗(c) (cores)

ne = ni , cm−3
Te , K
Ti , K
B, G
βi

30
∼ 105(e)
5 × 105
10−4
5

0.5
8000
8000
10−6
14

106
1011
∼ 1012 (f)
30
4

6 × 10−2
3 × 107
?(e)
7 × 10−6
9

vthi , km/s
vA , km/s
U, km/s(f)

90
40
∼ 10

10
3
∼ 10

105
7 × 104
∼ 104

700
60
∼ 102

L, km(f)
(mi /me )1/2 λmfpi , km
λmfpi , km(g)
ρi , km
ρe , km

∼ 105
1010
3 × 108
90
2

∼ 1015
2 × 108
6 × 106
1000
30

∼ 108
4 × 1010
109
0.4
0.003

∼ 1017
4 × 1016
1015
105
200

a

Data for slow wind (Vsw = 350 km/s) measured by Cluster spacecraft
and taken from Bale et al. (2005), except the value of Te , which they do
not report, but which is expected to be close to Ti (Newbury et al. 1998).
See Bruno & Carbone (2005) for fast-wind parameters and another set
of numbers for the slow wind as measured by Helios 2. See discussion
in § 8.1.
b Typical values (see, e.g., Norman & Ferrara 1996; Ferrière 2001). See
discussion in § 8.2.
c Data based on observational constraints for the radio-emitting plasma
around the Galactic Center (Sgr A∗ ) as interpreted by Loeb & Waxman
(2007) (see also Quataert 2003). See discussion in § 8.3.
d Data for the core region of the Hydra A cluster taken from
Ensslin & Vogt (2006); see Schekochihin & Cowley 2006a for a consistent set of numbers for the hot plasmas outside the cores. See discussion
in § 8.4.
e We assume T = T for these estimates.
e
i
f Rough order-of-magnitude estimate.
g Defined λ
mfpi = vthi /νii , where νii is given by Eq. (44).

a range of scales) comparable with the size of the system, depending on its global properties, and much larger
than the microphysical scales at which energy can be dissipated and converted into heat. Examples of large-scale
stirring of turbulent fluctuations include the solar activity in
the corona (launching Alfvén waves to produce turbulence
in the solar wind); supernova explosions in the ISM (e.g.,
Norman & Ferrara 1996; Ferrière 2001); the magnetorotational instability in accretion disks (Balbus & Hawley 1998);
merger events, galaxy wakes and active galactic nuclei in
galaxy clusters (e.g., Subramanian et al. 2006; Ensslin & Vogt
2006; Chandran 2005a). Since in this paper we are concerned
with the local properties of astrophysical plasmas, let us simply assume that energy injection occurs at some characteristic outer scale L. All further considerations will apply to
scales that are much smaller than L and we will assume that
the particular character of the energy injection does not matter
at these small scales.
In what follows, we assume that a strong uniform mean
field is present. Strictly speaking, this model choice is only
applicable at scales sufficiently smaller than L: at the outer
scale, magnetic field lines are bent and we would have to discuss the ways in which such a regular field can be created
in various astrophysical conditions-a highly nontrivial issue
that is beyond the scope of this paper (see also the discussion
in § 8.2.3). In a similar vein, we neglect the role of any outer-

4

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

F IG . 1.- Partition of the wave-number space by characteristic scales. The wave numbers are normalized by l0 ∼ v3A /ε, where ε is the total power input (see
§ 1.1). Dotted line shows the path an Alfvén-wave cascade stirred at the outer scale L ∼ l0 takes through the wave-number space. We also show the regions of
validity of the three tertiary approximations. They all require kk ≪ k⊥ (anisotropic fluctuations) and kk ρi ∼ kk vthi /Ωi ≪ 1 (low-frequency limit). Reduced
MHD (RMHD, § 2) is valid when k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi ≪ (me /mi )1/2 (strongly magnetized collisional limit, adiabatic electrons). The regions of validity of Kinetic
Reduced MHD (KRMHD, § 5) and Electron Reduced MHD (ERMHD, § 7) lie within that of the isothermal electron/gyrokinetic ion approximation (Fig. 3) with
the additional requirement that k⊥ ρi ≪ min(1, kk λmfpi ) (strongly magnetized ions) for KRMHD or k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 (unmagnetized ions) for ERMHD. The collisional
limit of KRMHD (§ 6.1 and Appendix D), (me /mi )1/2 ≪ kk λmfpi ≪ 1, is similar to RMHD, except electrons are isothermal. The dotted line is the scaling of kk
vs k⊥ from critical balance in both the Alfvén-wave [§ 1.1, Eq. (4)] and kinetic-Alfvén-wave [§ 7.2, Eq. (209)] regimes.

scale gradients of density or temperature that may exist in the
astrophysical plasmas that we are studying.
There are four scales at which dissipation occurs and
which, therefore, mark the transitions between distinct physical regimes:
Electron diffusion scale. - At kk λmfpi (mi /me )1/2 ≫ 1, the

electron response is isothermal (§ 4.4, Appendix A.4). At
kk λmfpi (mi /me )1/2 ≪ 1, it is adiabatic (§ 4.8.4, Appendix A.3).

Mean free path. - At kk λmfpi ≫ 1, the plasma is collisionless.
In this regime, wave-particle interactions can dissipate some
of the turbulent fluctuations via Barnes damping (§ 6.2). At
kk λmfpi ≪ 1, the plasma is collisional and fluid-like (§ 6.1,
Appendices A and D).
Ion gyroscale. - At k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, the ions are unmagnetized and
have a Boltzmann response (§ 7.1). At k⊥ ρi ∼ 1, they are
heated by wave-particle interactions (via a kinetic ion-entropy
cascade, see §§ 7.4-7.5). At k⊥ ρi ≪ 1, ions (as well as the
electrons) are magnetized and the magnetic field is frozen into
the ion flow (the E × B velocity field). Note that the ion iner−1/2
is comparable to the ion gyroscale unless
tial scale di = ρi βi
the plasma beta βi = 8πni Ti /B2 is very different from unity.
Electron gyroscale. - At k⊥ ρe ∼ 1, the electrons are heated

by wave-particle interactions (via a kinetic electron-entropy
cascade, see § 7.6). At k⊥ ρe ≪ 1, electrons are magnetized
and the magnetic field is frozen into the electron flow (§ 4,

§ 7, Appendix C).
Typical values of these scales and of several other key parameters are given in Table 1. In Fig. 1, we show how the
wave-number space, (k⊥ , kk ), is divided by these scales into
several domains, where the physics is different. Further partitioning of the wave-number space results from comparing
k⊥ ρi and kk λmfpi (k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi is the limit of strong magnetization, see Appendix A.2) and, most importantly, from
comparing parallel and perpendicular wave numbers. As we
explained above, observational and numerical evidence tells
us that Alfvénic turbulence is anisotropic, kk ≪ k⊥ . In Fig. 1,
we sketch the path the turbulent cascade is expected to take
in the wave-number space (we use the scalings of kk with k⊥
that follow from the GS argument for the Alfvén waves and an
analogous argument for the kinetic Alfvén waves, reviewed in
§ 1.1 and § 7.2, respectively).
1.4. Kinetic and Fluid Models

What is the correct analytical description of the turbulent
plasma along the (presumed) path of the cascade? As we
promised above, it is going to be possible to simplify the full
kinetic theory substantially. These simplifications can be obtained in the form of a hierarchy of approximations.
Gyrokinetics (§ 3). - The starting point for these developments and the primary approximation in the hierarchy is gyrokinetics, a low-frequency kinetic approximation achieved
by averaging over the cyclotron motion of the particles. Gyrokinetics is appropriate for the study of subsonic plasma

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
turbulence in virtually all astrophysically relevant parameter
ranges (Howes et al. 2006). For fluctuations at frequencies
lower than the ion cyclotron frequency, ω ≪ Ωi , gyrokinetics can be systematically derived by making use of the two
assumptions that underpin the GS theory: (a) anisotropy of
the turbulence, so ǫ ∼ kk /k⊥ is used as the small parameter, and (b) strong interactions, i.e., the fluctuation amplitudes
are assumed to be such that wave propagation and nonlinear
interaction occur on comparable time scales: from Eq. (3),
u⊥ /vA ∼ ǫ. The first of these assumptions implies that fluctuations at Alfvénic frequencies satisfy ω ∼ kk vA ≪ Ωi . This
makes gyrokinetics an ideal tool both for analytical theory and
for numerical studies of astrophysical plasma turbulence-the
numerical approaches are also made attractive by the long experience of gyrokinetic simulations accumulated in the fusion
research and by the existence of publicly available gyrokinetic codes (Kotschenreuther et al. 1995; Jenko et al. 2000;
Candy & Waltz 2003; Chen & Parker 2003). A concise review of gyrokinetics is provided in § 3. The reader is urged to
pay particular attention to § 3.4 and § 3.5, where the concept
of the kinetic cascade of generalized energy is introduced and
the particle heating in gyrokinetics is discussed. The region
of validity of gyrokinetics is illustrated in Fig. 2: it covers virtually the entire path of the turbulent cascade, except possibly
the largest scales. Note that the two-fluid theory, which is the
starting point for the MHD model (see Appendix A), is not an
appropriate description at collisionless scales.
Isothermal Electron Fluid (§ 4). - While gyrokinetics constitutes a significant simplification, it is still a fully kinetic
description. Further progress towards simpler models is
achieved by showing that, for parallel scales below the electron diffusion scale, kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 , and perpendicular
scales above the electron gyroscale, k⊥ ρe ≪ 1, the electrons
are a magnetized isothermal fluid while ions must be treated
kinetically. This is the secondary approximation in our hierarchy, derived in § 4 via an asymptotic expansion in (me /mi )1/2
(see also Appendix C.1). The plasma is described by the
ion gyrokinetic equation and two fluid-like equations that
contain electron dynamics-these are summarized in § 4.9.
The region of validity of this approximation is illustrated in
Fig. 3: it does not capture the dissipative effects around the
electron diffusion scale or the electron heating, but it remains
uniformly valid as the cascade passes from collisional to
collisionless scales and also as it crosses the ion gyroscale.

In order to elucidate the nature of the turbulence above and
below the ion gyroscale, we derive two tertiary approximations, valid for k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 (§ 5) and for k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 (§ 7; see also
Appendix C, which gives a nonrigorous, nongyrokinetic, but
perhaps more intuitive, derivation of the results of § 4 and § 7).
Kinetic Reduced MHD (§ 5 and § 6). - On scales above the ion
gyroscale, known as the "inertial range" we demonstrate that
the decoupling of the Alfvén-wave cascade and its indifference to both collisional and collisionless damping are explicit
and analytically provable properties. We show rigorously
the Alfvén-wave cascade is governed by a closed set of two
fluid-like equations for the stream and flux functions-the Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (RMHD)-independently of
the collisionality (§ 5.3 and § 5.4; the derivation of RMHD
from MHD and its properties are discussed in § 2). The cascade proceeds via interaction of oppositely propagating wave
packets and is decoupled from the density and magnetic-field-

5

strength fluctuations (in the collisional limit, these are the
entropy and slow modes; see § 6.1 and Appendix D). The
latter are passively mixed by the Alfvén waves, but, unlike
in the fluid (collisional) limit, this passive cascade is governed by a (simplified) kinetic equation for the ions (§ 5.5).
Together with RMHD, it forms a hybrid fluid-kinetic description of magnetized turbulence in a weakly collisional
plasma, which we call Kinetic Reduced MHD (KRMHD).
The KRMHD equations are summarized in § 5.7. While
the Alfvén waves are undamped in this approximation, the
density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations are subject
to damping both in the collisional (Braginskii 1965 viscous
damping, § 6.1 and Appendix D) and collisionless (Barnes
1966 damping, § 6.2) limits, provided they develop scales
along the magnetic field that are comparable to or smaller than
the mean free path. However, the ion kinetic equation is linear along the moving field lines associated with the Alfvén
waves, so, in the absence of finite-gyroradius effects, the density and field-strength fluctuations do not develop small parallel scales and their cascade may be undamped above the ion
gyroscale-this is discussed in § 6.3.
Electron Reduced MHD (§ 7). - At the ion gyroscale, the
Alfvénic and the passive cascades are no longer decoupled
and their energy is partially damped via collisionless waveparticle interactions. This part of the energy is channelled into
ion heat. The rest of it is converted into a cascade of kinetic
Alfvén waves (KAW, also sometimes referred to in astrophysical literature as whistlers; see, e.g., Quataert & Gruzinov
1999). This cascade extends through what is known as
the "dissipation range" to the electron gyroscale, where
its energy is also damped by wave-particle interaction and
transferred into electron heat. The KAW turbulence is
again anisotropic with kk ≪ k⊥ . It is governed by a pair
of fluid-like equations, also derived from gyrokinetics. We
call them Electron Reduced MHD (ERMHD) because they
are the reduced (anisotropic) form of what is known as the
Electron, or Hall, MHD (Kingsep et al. 1990). The ERMHD
equations are derived in § 7.1 (see also Appendix C.2) and
the KAW cascade is discussed in § 7.2. In § 7.4 and § 7.6,
we consider the entropy cascade below the ion gyroscale-a
process whereby the collisionless damping occurring at the
ion and electron gyroscales is made irreversible and particles
are heated. This part of the cascade is purely kinetic and its
salient feature is the particle distribution functions developing
small scales in phase space.

The regions of validity of the tertiary approximations-
KRMHD and ERMHD-are illustrated in Fig. 1. In this figure, we also show the region of validity of the RMHD system derived from the standard compressible MHD equations
by assuming anisotropy of the turbulence and strong interactions. This derivation is the fluid analog of the derivation
of gyrokinetics. We present it in § 2, before embarking on
the gyrokinetics-based path outlined above, in order to make
a connection with the conventional MHD treatment and to
demonstrate with particular simplicity how the assumption of
anisotropy leads to a reduced fluid system in which the decoupling of the cascades of the Alfvén waves, slow waves and the
entropy mode is manifest (Appendix A extends this derivation
to Braginskii 1965 two-fluid equations in the limit of strong
magnetization; it also works out rigorously the transition from
the fluid limit to the KRMHD equations).
The main formal developments of this paper are contained

6

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

in §§ 3-7. The outline given above is meant to help the reader
navigate these sections. A reader who would rather avoid
exposure to technicalities should gain a fairly good practical understanding of what is done there by reading § 2, § 3.1,
§§ 3.4-3.5, § 4.9, § 5.7, § 6.3, and § 7.8. In § 8, we discuss
at some length how our results apply to various astrophysical
plasmas with weak collisionality: the solar wind, the ISM, accretion disks, and galaxy clusters. Finally, in § 9, we provide a
brief epilogue and make a few remarks about future directions
of inquiry. A number of technical appendices is included-
in particular, Appendix B treats in some detail the collision
terms in gyrokinetics, a subject that has so far received relatively little analytically thorough and practically useful treatment in the literature.
2. REDUCED MHD AND THE DECOUPLING OF TURBULENT
CASCADES

Consider the equations of compressible MHD
dρ
∇ * u,
= −ρ∇
(5)
dt


∇B
du
B *∇
B2
∇ p+
ρ
+
= −∇
,
(6)
dt
8π
4π
5
p
ds
= 0, s = γ , γ = ,
(7)
dt
ρ
3
dB
∇u − B∇
∇ * u,
= B *∇
(8)
dt
where ρ is mass density, u velocity, p pressure, B magnetic
field, s entropy density, and d/dt = ∂/∂t + u * ∇ (the conditions under which these equations are valid are discussed in
Appendix A). Consider a uniform static equilibrium with a
straight mean field in the z direction, so
ρ = ρ0 + δρ,

p = p0 + δ p,

B = B0 ẑ + δB,

(9)

where ρ0 , p0 , and B0 are constants. In what follows, the subscripts k and ⊥ will be used to denote the projections of fields,
variables and gradients on the mean-field direction ẑ and onto
the plane (x, y) perpendicular to this direction, respectively.
2.1. RMHD Ordering

As we explained in the Introduction, observational and numerical evidence makes it safe to assume that the turbulence
in such a system will be anisotropic with kk ≪ k⊥ . Let us,
therefore, introduce a small parameter ǫ ∼ kk /k⊥ and carry
out a systematic expansion of Eqs. (5-8) in ǫ. In this expansion, the fluctuations are treated as small, but not arbitrarily
so: in order to estimate their size, we shall adopt the criticalbalance conjecture (3), which is now treated not as a detailed
scaling prescription but as an ordering assumption. This allows us to introduce the following ordering:
uk
δBk
kk
δ p δB⊥
δρ u⊥
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼ ǫ, (10)
ρ0
vA
vA
p0
B0
B0
k⊥
√
where vA = B0 / 4πρ0 is the Alfvén speed.
In Eq. (10), we made two auxiliary ordering assumptions: that the velocity and magnetic-field fluctuations
have the character of Alfvén and slow waves (δB⊥ /B0 ∼
u⊥ /vA , δBk /B0 ∼ uk /vA ) and that the relative amplitudes
of the Alfvén-wave-polarized fluctuations (δB⊥ /B0 , u⊥ /vA ),
slow-wave-polarized fluctuations (δBk /B0 , uk /vA ) and density/pressure/entropy fluctuations (δρ/ρ0 , δ p/p0 ) are all the
same order. Strictly speaking, whether this is the case depends

on the energy sources that drive the turbulence: as we shall
see, if no slow waves (or entropy fluctuations) are launched,
none will be present. However, in astrophysical contexts, the
large-scale energy input may be assumed random and, therefore, comparable power is injected into all types of fluctuations.
We further assume that the characteristic frequency of the
fluctuations is ω ∼ kk vA [Eq. (3)], meaning that the fast waves,
for which ω ≃ k⊥ (v2A + c2s )1/2 , where c2s = γ p0 /ρ0 (the sound
speed), are ordered out. This restriction must be justified
empirically. Observations of the solar wind turbulence confirm that it is primarily Alfvénic (see, e.g., Bale et al. 2005)
and that its compressive component is substantially pressurebalanced (Marsch & Tu 1993; Bavassano et al. 2004, see
Eq. (17) below). A weak-turbulence calculation of compressible MHD turbulence in low-beta plasmas (Chandran
2005b) suggests that only a small amount of energy is transferred from the fast waves to Alfvén waves with large kk .
A similar conclusion emerges from numerical simulations
(Cho & Lazarian 2002, 2003). As the fast waves are also expected to be subject to strong collisionless damping and/or to
strong dissipation after they steepen into shocks, eliminating
them from the problem and concentrating on low-frequency
turbulence appears to be a reasonable course of action.
2.2. Alfvén Waves
We start by observing that the Alfvén-wave-polarized
fluctuations are two-dimensionally solenoidal: since, from
Eq. (5),
d δρ
∇ *u = −
= O(ǫ2 )
(11)
dt ρ0
and ∇ * δB = 0 exactly, separating the O(ǫ) part of these divergences gives ∇ ⊥ * u⊥ = 0 and ∇ ⊥ * δB⊥ = 0. To lowest order
in the ǫ expansion, we may, therefore, express u⊥ and δB⊥ in
terms of scalar stream (flux) functions:
δB⊥
√
u⊥ = ẑ × ∇ ⊥ Φ,
= ẑ × ∇ ⊥ Ψ.
(12)
4πρ0
Evolution equations for Φ and Ψ are obtained by substituting
the expressions (12) into the perpendicular parts of the induction equation (8) and the momentum equation (6)-of the latter the curl is taken to annihilate the pressure term. Keeping
only the terms of the lowest order, O(ǫ2 ), we get
∂Φ
∂Ψ
+ {Φ, Ψ} = vA
,
(13)
∂t
∂z


∂ 2
∂
∇ Φ + Φ, ∇2⊥ Φ = vA ∇2⊥ Ψ + Ψ, ∇2⊥ Ψ , (14)
∂t ⊥
∂z
∇⊥ Φ × ∇ ⊥ Ψ) and we have taken into
where {Φ, Ψ} = ẑ * (∇
account that, to lowest order,
∂
d ∂
∇⊥ =
= + u⊥ *∇
+ {Φ, * * *} ,
(15)
dt ∂t
∂t
∂ δB⊥
∂
1
∇= +
∇⊥ =
b̂ *∇
*∇
(16)
+ {Ψ, * * *} .
∂z B0
∂z vA

Here b̂ = B/B0 is the unit vector along the perturbed field line.
Equations (13-14) are known as the Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (RMHD). The first derivations of these
equations (in the context of fusion plasmas) are due to
Kadomtsev & Pogutse (1974) and to Strauss (1976). These
were followed by many systematic derivations and generalizations employing various versions and refinements of

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
the basic expansion, taking into account the non-Alfvénic
modes (as we do in § 2.3), and including the effects of spatial gradients of equilibrium fields (see, e.g., Strauss 1977;
Montgomery 1982; Hazeltine 1983; Zank & Matthaeus 1992,
1993; Kinney & McWilliams 1997; Bhattacharjee et al. 1998;
Kruger et al. 1998, and references therein). A comparative
analysis of these expansion schemes and their (often close)
relationship to ours falls outside the scope of this paper. One
important point we emphasize is that we do not assume the
plasma beta [defined in Eq. (26)] to be either large or small.
Equations (13) and (14) form a closed set, meaning that the
Alfvén-wave cascade decouples from the slow waves and density fluctuations. It is to the turbulence described by Eqs. (1314) that the GS theory outlined in § 1.1 applies.9
2.3. Slow Waves and the Entropy Mode
In order to derive evolution equations for the latter, let us
first revisit the perpendicular part of the momentum equation
and use Eq. (10) to order terms in it. In the lowest order, O(ǫ),
we get the pressure balance


B0 δBk
δp
v2 δBk
=0 ⇒
= −γ A2
. (17)
∇⊥ δ p +
4π
p0
cs B 0

Using Eq. (17) and the entropy equation (7), we get


δs δ p
δρ
δρ v2A δBk
d δs
, (18)
= 0,
=
−γ
= −γ
+ 2
dt s0
s0 p0
ρ0
ρ0 c s B 0
where s0 = p0 /ργ0 . Now, substituting Eq. (11) for ∇ * u in the
parallel component of the induction equation (8), we get


d δBk δρ
∇uk = 0.
− b̂ *∇
(19)
−
dt B0 ρ0

Combining Eqs. (18) and (19), we obtain
d δρ
1
∇ uk ,
b̂ *∇
=−
dt ρ0
1 + c2s /v2A
d δBk
1
∇ uk .
b̂ *∇
=
dt B0 1 + v2A/c2s

(20)
(21)

Finally, we take the parallel component of the momentum
equation (6) and notice that, due to the pressure balance (17)
and to the smallness of the parallel gradients, the pressure
term is O(ǫ3 ), while the inertial and tension terms are O(ǫ2 ).
Therefore,
δBk
duk
∇
.
= v2A b̂ *∇
dt
B0

7

Equations (21-22) describe the slow-wave-polarized fluctuations, while Eq. (18) describes the zero-frequency entropy
mode, which is decoupled from the slow waves (for other expansion schemes leading to reduced sets of equations for the
non-Alfvénic modes see references in § 2.2. The nonlinearity
in Eqs. (21-22) enters via the derivatives defined in Eqs. (1516) and is due solely to interactions with Alfvén waves. Thus,
both the slow-wave and the entropy-fluctuation cascades occur via passive scattering/mixing by Alfvén waves, in the
course of which there is no energy exchange between the cascades. The turbulent cascade of the passive fields is discussed
in § 2.6 and also in § 6.3, where we examine the implications
of the fact that the equations for the slow and entropy modes
become linear in the Lagrangian frame associated with the
Alfvénic turbulence.
2.4. Elsasser Fields for RMHD

The MHD equations (5-8) in the incompressible limit (ρ =
const) acquire a symmetric form
√ if written in terms of the
Elsasser fields z± = u ± δB/ 4πρ (Elsasser 1950). Let us
demonstrate how this symmetry manifests itself in the reduced equations derived above.
We introduce Elsasser potentials ζ ± = Φ ± Ψ, so that z±
⊥=
ẑ × ∇ ⊥ ζ ± . For these potentials, Eqs. (13-14) become

∂
1  + 2 −  − 2 +
∂ 2 ±
ζ , ∇⊥ ζ + ζ , ∇⊥ ζ
∇ ζ ∓ vA ∇2⊥ ζ ± = −
∂t ⊥
∂z
2

∓∇2⊥ {ζ + , ζ − } .
(23)

These equations show that the RMHD has a simple set of
exact solutions: if ζ − = 0 or ζ + = 0, the nonlinear term
vanishes and the other, nonzero, Elsasser potential is simply a fluctuation of arbitrary shape and magnitude propagating along the mean field at the Alfvén speed vA : ζ ± =
f ± (x, y, z ∓ vAt). These solutions are called finite-amplitude
Alfvén waves. Only counterpropagating such solutions can
interact and thereby give rise to the Alfvén-wave cascade
(Kraichnan 1965). Note that these interactions are conservative in the sense that the "+" and "−" waves scatter off each
other without exchanging energy.
For the slow-wave variables, we may introduce generalized
Elsasser fields:
1/2

δBk
v2A
±
.
(24)
1+ 2
zk = uk ± √
cs
4πρ0
Straightforwardly, the evolution equation for these fields is

(22)

9 The Alfvén-wave turbulence in the RMHD system has been studied by
many authors. Some of the more recent numerical investigations are due to
Kinney & McWilliams (1998), Dmitruk et al. (2003), Oughton et al. (2004).
Analytical theory has mostly been confined to the weak-turbulence paradigm
(Ng & Bhattacharjee 1996, 1997; Bhattacharjee & Ng 2001; Galtier et al.
2002; Lithwick & Goldreich 2003). We note that adopting the critical balance [Eq. (3)] as an ordering assumption for the expansion in kk /k⊥ does
not preclude one from subsequently attempting a weak-turbulence approach:
the latter should simply be treated as a subsidiary expansion. Indeed, implementing the anisotropy assumption on the level of MHD equations rather than
simultaneously with the weak-turbulence closure (Galtier et al. 2000) significantly reduces the amount of algebra. One should, however, bear in mind
that the weak-turbulence approximation always breaks down at some sufficiently small scale-namely, when k⊥ ∼ (vA /U)2 kk2 L, where L is the outer
scale of the turbulence, U velocity at the outer scale, and kk the parallel wave
number of the Alfvén waves (see Goldreich & Sridhar 1997 or the review
by Schekochihin & Cowley 2006b). Below this scale, interactions cannot be
assumed weak.

∂z±
k

±

∂zk
vA
∓p
=
∂t
1 + v2A/c2s ∂z
1
−
2

1
−
2

1

!

{ζ + , z±
k}

1

!

{ζ − , z±
k }.

1∓ p
1 + v2A /c2s
1± p
1 + v2A /c2s

(25)

In the limit vA ≪ cs , the generalized Elsasser fields (24) become the parallel components of the conventional incompressible Elsasser fields. This is known as the high-beta limit,
with the plasma beta defined by
β=

8π p0 2 c2s
=
.
γ v2A
B20

(26)

8

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

We see that only in the limit of β ≫ 1 do the slow waves interact exclusively with the counterpropagating Alfvén waves.
For general β, the phase speed of the slow waves is smaller
than that of the Alfvén waves and, therefore, Alfvén waves
can "catch up" and interact with the slow waves that travel in
the same direction. All of these interactions are of scattering
type and involve no exchange of energy.
2.5. Five RMHD Cascades
Thus, the anisotropy and critical balance (3) taken as
ordering assumptions lead to a neat decomposition of the
MHD turbulent cascade into a decoupled Alfvén-wave cascade and cascades of slow waves and entropy fluctuations passively scattered/mixed by the Alfvén waves. More precisely,
Eqs. (18), (23) and (25) imply that, for arbitrary β, there are
five conserved quantities:
Z
1
∇ζ ± |2 (Alfvén waves),
W⊥± =
d 3 r ρ0 |∇
(27)
2
Z
1
2
d 3 r ρ0 |z±
(slow waves),
(28)
Wk± =
k|
2
Z
1
δs2
Ws =
d3r 2
(entropy fluctuations). (29)
2
s0

W⊥+ and W⊥− are always cascaded by interaction with each
other, Ws is passively mixed by W⊥+ and W⊥− , Wk± are passively
scattered by W⊥∓ and, unless β ≫ 1, also by W⊥± .

2.6. Discussion
The decoupling of the slow- and Alfvén-wave cascades in
MHD turbulence was studied in some detail and confirmed
in direct numerical simulations by Maron & Goldreich (2001,
for β ≫ 1) and by Cho & Lazarian (2002, 2003, for a range
of values of β). The derivation given in § 2.2 and § 2.3 (cf.
Lithwick & Goldreich 2001) provides a straightforward theoretical basis for these results, assuming anisotropy of the turbulence (which was also confirmed in these numerical studies).
In astrophysical turbulence, β tends to be order unity or
moderately high: β ∼ 1 . . . 10 by order of magnitude for all of
the astrophysical plasmas mentioned in the Introduction (see
Table 1; the solar corona, where β ∼ 10−6 , is one prominent
example of the extreme opposite limit). In the high-beta limit,
which is equivalent to the incompressible approximation for
the slow waves, density fluctuations are due solely to the entropy mode. They decouple from the slow-wave cascade and
are passively mixed by the Alfvén-wave turbulence:

dδρ
=0
(30)
dt
[Eq. (18) or Eq. (20), cs ≫ vA ].
The scaling of such passively mixed scalar fields is slaved to
the scaling of the Alfvénic fluctuations. As in Kolmogorov–
Obukhov theory (see § 1.1), one assumes a local-in-scalespace cascade of scalar variance and a constant flux εn of this
variance. Then, analogously to Eq. (1), δρ2λ /τλ ∼ εn . The
∇ ⊥ ∼ vA /lkλ ∼ ε/u2⊥λ . This gives
cascade time is τλ−1 ∼ u⊥ *∇
δρλ ∼ (εn /ε)

1/2

u⊥λ ,

(31)

so the scalar fluctuations have the same scaling as the turbulence that mixes them (Obukhov 1949; Corrsin 1951), i.e.,
in the GS turbulence, the scalar variance spectrum should be

−5/3

k⊥ The same argument applies to all passive fields, e.g., the
magnetic-field-strength fluctuations (see § 6.3 for a discussion
of the anisotropy and the parallel cascade of the passive component of MHD turbulence).
It is precisely the electron-density spectrum that provides
the main evidence of the k−5/3 scaling in the interstellar turbulence (Armstrong et al. 1995; Lazio et al. 2004). The explanation of this spectrum in terms of passive mixing of the entropy
mode, originally conjectured by Higdon (1984), was developed on the basis of the GS theory by Lithwick & Goldreich
(2001).
It turns out that the decoupling of the Alfvén-wave cascade
that we demonstrated above for the anisotropic MHD turbulence is a uniformly valid property of plasma turbulence at
both collisional and collisionless scales and that this cascade
is correctly described by the RMHD equations (13-14) all the
way down to the ion gyroscale, while the fluctuations of density and magnetic-field strength do not satisfy simple fluid
evolution equations anymore and require solving the kinetic
equation (see discussion of these cascades and of the relevant
solar-wind data in § 6.3). In order to prove this, we adopt a
kinetic description and apply to it the same ordering (§ 2.1)
as we used to reduce the MHD equations. The kinetic theory
that emerges as a result is called gyrokinetics.
3. GYROKINETICS

The gyrokinetic formalism was first worked out
for linear waves by Rutherford & Frieman (1968)
and by Taylor & Hastie (1968) (see also Catto 1978;
Antonsen & Lane 1980; Catto et al. 1981) and subsequently
extended to the nonlinear regime by Frieman & Chen (1982).
Rigorous derivations of the gyrokinetic equation based on
the Hamiltonian formalism were developed by Dubin et al.
(1983, electrostatic) and Hahm et al. (1988, electromagnetic).
This approach is reviewed in Brizard & Hahm (2007). A
more pedestrian, but perhaps also more transparent exposition
of the gyrokinetics in a straight mean field can be found in
Howes et al. (2006), who also provide a detailed explanation
of the gyrokinetic ordering in the context of astrophysical
plasma turbulence and a treatment of the linear waves and
damping rates. Here we review only the main points so as
to allow the reader to understand the present paper without
referring elsewhere.
In general, a plasma is completely described by the distribution function fs (t, r, v)-the probability density for a particle
of species s (= i, e) to be found at the spatial position r moving with velocity v. This function obeys the kinetic Vlasov–
Landau equation
qs
∂ fs
∇ fs +
+ v *∇
∂t
ms



E+




∂ fs
v×B
∂ fs
*
, (32)
=
c
∂v
∂t c

where qs and ms are the particle's charge and mass, c is the
speed of light, and the right-hand side is the collision term
(quadratic in f ). The electric and magnetic fields are
∇φ −
E = −∇

1 ∂A
,
c ∂t

B = ∇×A

(33)

(the first equality is Faraday's law uncurled, the second the
magnetic-field solenoidality condition). They satisfy the Poisson and the Ampère–Maxwell equations with the charge and

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
current densities determined by fs (t, r, v):
X
X Z
∇ * E = 4π
qs ns = 4π
qs d 3 v f s ,
s

∇ ×B−

(34)

s

1 ∂E 4π
4π X
=
j=
qs
c ∂t
c
c s

Z

d 3 v v fs .

(35)

3.1. Gyrokinetic Ordering and Dimensionless Parameters

As in § 2 we set up a static equilibrium with a uniform mean
field, B0 = B0 ẑ, E0 = 0, assume that the perturbations will
be anisotropic with kk ≪ k⊥ , and construct an expansion of
the kinetic theory around this equilibrium with respect to the
small parameter ǫ ∼ kk /k⊥ . Besides ǫ, several other dimensionless parameters are present: the electron-ion mass ratio
me /mi , the charge ratio
Z = qi /|qe | = qi /e

(36)

τ = Ti /Te ,

(37)

(for hydrogen, this is 1, which applies to most astrophysical
plasmas of interest to us), the temperature ratio10
and the plasma (ion) beta
βi =

v2thi
v2A

and (see, e.g., Helander & Sigmar 2002)
r
τ 3/2 mi
νii ,
νei = Zνee = 2
Z
me
r
8 τ 3/2 me
νie = √
νii ,
3 π Z
mi
√
2πZ 4 e4 ni ln Λ
,
νii =
1/2 3/2
mi Ti

9

(42)
(43)
(44)

where ln Λ is the Coulomb logarithm and the numerical factor in the definition of νie has been inserted for future notational convenience (see Appendix A). We always define
λmfpi = vthi /νii and λmfpe = vthe /νei = (Z/τ )2 λmfpi .
Equation (3) now allows us to order the fluctuations of the
electric field: on the one hand, we have from Eq. (3) u⊥ ∼
ǫvA ; on the other hand, the plasma mass flow velocity is (to
the lowest order) the E × B drift velocity of the ions, u⊥ ∼
cE⊥ /B0 ∼ ck⊥ φ/B0 , so
eφ τ
1
√ ǫ.
∼
Te
Z k ⊥ ρ i βi

(45)

Finally, Eq. (3) implies

−1

Z
8πni Ti
,
= β 1+
=
τ
B20

(38)

where vthi = (2Ti /mi )1/2 is the ion thermal speed and the total
β was defined in Eq. (26) based on the total pressure p = ni Ti +
ne Te .
We now adopt the ordering expressed by Eqs. (3) and (10),
i.e., we assume the perturbations to be strongly interacting Alfvén waves plus electron density and magnetic-fieldstrength fluctuations. As we want our theory to be uniformly
valid at all (perpendicular) scales above, at or below the ion
gyroscale, we order
k⊥ ρi ∼ 1,

(39)

where ρi = vthi /Ωi is the ion gyroradius, Ωi = qi B0 /cmi the
ion cyclotron frequency. Similarly, we want our theory to be
valid both in the collisional and the collisionless regimes, so
we do not assume ω to be either smaller or larger than the
(ion) collision frequency νii :
kk λmfpi
ω
∼ 1,
(40)
∼ √
νii
βi
where λmfpi = vthi /νii is the ion mean free path (this ordering
can actually be inferred from equating the gyrokinetic entropy
production terms to the collisional entropy production; see
extended discussion in Howes et al. 2006).
Note that
r
Z
me
ρe = √
ρi
(41)
τ mi
10 It can be shown that equilibrium temperatures change on the time
scale ∼ (ǫ2 ω)−1 (Howes et al. 2006). On the other hand, from standard
theory of collisional transport (e.g., Helander & Sigmar 2002), the ion and
electron temperatures equalize on the time scale ∼ νie−1 ∼ (mi /me )1/2 νii−1
[see Eq. (43)]. Therefore, τ can depart from unity by an amount of order
ǫ2 (ω/νii )(mi /me )1/2 . In our ordering scheme [Eq. (40)], this is O(ǫ2 ) and,
therefore, we should simply set τ = 1 + O(ǫ2 ). However, we shall carry the
parameter τ because other ordering schemes are possible that permit arbitrary
values of τ . These are appropriate to plasmas with very weak collisions. For
example, in the solar wind, τ appears to be order unity but not exactly 1
(Newbury et al. 1998), while in accretion flows near the black hole, some
models predict τ ≫ 1 (see § 8.3).

kk vA
k ⊥ ρi
ω
∼
∼ √ ǫ.
Ωi
Ωi
βi

(46)

Thus, gyrokinetics is a low-frequency limit that averages over
the time scales associated with the particle gyration. Because
we have assumed that the fluctuations are anisotropic and have
(by order of magnitude) Alfvénic frequencies, we see from
Eq. (46) that their frequency remains far below Ωi at all scales,
including the ion and even electron gyroscale-the gyrokinetics remains valid at all of these scales and the cyclotronfrequency effects are negligible (cf. Quataert & Gruzinov
1999).
Note that several parameters have been introduced above
that are considered to be order unity in the gyrokinetic expansion: me /mi , βi , k⊥ ρi and kk λmfpi . Subsidiary expansions
in small me /mi (§ 4) and in small or large values of the other
three parameters (§§ 5-7) can be carried out at a later stage as
long as their values are not so large or small as to interfere
with the primary expansion in ǫ.
The region of validity of the gyrokinetic approximation in
the wave-number space is illustrated in Fig. 2-it embraces
all of the scales that are expected to be tranversed by the
anisotropic energy cascade.
3.2. Gyrokinetic Equation
Given the gyrokinetic ordering introduced above, the expansion of the distribution function up to first order in ǫ can
be written as
qs φ(t, r)
F0s (v) + hs(t, Rs , v⊥ , vk ). (47)
fs (t, r, v) = F0s (v) −
T0s
To zeroth order, it is a Maxwellian:
r
 2 
v
n0s
2T0s
exp − 2 , vths =
F0s (v) =
, (48)
2
3/2
ms
(πvths )
vths

whith uniform density n0s and temperature T0s and no mean
flow. As will be explained in more detail in § 3.5, F0s has a
slow time dependence via the equilibrium tempearture, T0s =
T0s (ǫ2t). This reflects the slow heating of the plasma as the turbulent energy is dissipated. However, T0s can be treated as a

10

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

F IG . 2.- The regions of validity in the wave-number space of two primary approximations-the two-fluid (Appendix A.1) and gyrokinetic (§ 3). The
gyrokinetic theory holds when kk ≪ k⊥ and ω ≪ Ωi [when kk ≪ k⊥ < ρ−1
i , the second requirement is automatically satisfied for Alfvén, slow and entropy
modes; see Eq. (46)]. The two-fluid equations hold when kk λmfpi ≪ 1 (collisional limit) and k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 (magnetized plasma). Note that the gyrokinetic theory
holds for all but the very largest scales.

constant with respect to the time dependence of the first-order
distribution function (the time scale of the turbulent fluctuations). The first-order part of the distribution function is composed of the Boltzmann response [second term in Eq. (47)]
and the gyrocenter distribution function hs . The spatial dependence of the latter is expressed not by the particle position
r but by the position Rs of the particle gyrocenter (or guiding
center)-the center of the ring orbit that the particle follows
in a strong guide field:
Rs = r +

v⊥ × ẑ
.
Ωs

(49)

Thus, some of the velocity dependence of the distribution
function is subsumed in the Rs dependence of hs . Explicitly,
hs depends only on two velocity-space variables: v⊥ and vk
(we shall sometimes find an alternative pair, v and ξ = vk /v,
useful). What has to be constantly kept in mind is that derivatives of hs with respect to these variables are taken at constant
Rs , not at constant r.
The function hs satisfies the gyrokinetic equation:


qs F0s ∂hχiRs
∂hs c
∂hs
∂hs
,
+ vk
+ {hχiRs , hs } =
+
∂t
∂z B0
T0s
∂t
∂t c
(50)
where
χ(t, r, v) = φ −

v k A k v ⊥ * A⊥
−
,
c
c

the Poisson brackets are defined in the usual way:


∂hs
∂hχiRs
,
×
{hχiRs , hs } = ẑ *
∂Rs
∂Rs

(51)

(52)

and the ring average notation is introduced:

hχ(t, r, v)iRs =

1
2π

Z

0

2π



v⊥ × ẑ
, v , (53)
dφ χ t, Rs −
Ωs

where φ is the angle in the velocity space taken in the plane
perpendicular to the guide field B0 ẑ. Note that, while χ is
a function of r, its ring average is a function of Rs . Note
also that the ring averages depend on the species index, as
does the gyrocenter variable Rs . Equation (50) is derived by
transforming the first-order kinetic equation to the gyrocenter
variable (49) and ring averaging the result (see Howes et al.
2006, or the references given at the beginning of § 3). The
ring-averaged collision integral (∂hs/∂t)c is discussed in Appendix B.

3.3. Field Equations

To Eq. (50), we must append the equations that determine
the electromagnetic field, namely, the potentials φ(t, r) and
A(t, r) that enter the expression for χ [Eq. (51)]. In the nonrelativistic limit (vthi ≪ c), these are the plasma quasineutrality constraint [which follows from the Poisson equation (34)
to lowest order in vthi /c]:

0=

X
s

qs δns =

X
s



qs φ
n0s +
qs −
T0s

Z

3

d vhhs ir



(54)

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
and the parallel and perpendicular parts of Ampère's law
[Eq. (35) to lowest order in ǫ and in vthi /c]:
Z
4π X
4π
2
jk = −
∇⊥ Ak = −
qs d 3 v vk hhs ir ,
(55)
c
c s


4π
ẑ * ∇ ⊥ × j⊥
c
"
#
X Z
4π
3
= − ẑ * ∇ ⊥ ×
qs d vhv⊥ hs ir , (56)
c
s

∇2⊥ δBk = −

∇⊥ × A⊥ ) and dropped the diswhere we have used δBk = ẑ* (∇
placement current. Since field variables φ, Ak and δBk are
functions of the spatial variable r, not of the gyrocenter variable Rs , we had to determine the contribution from the gyrocenter distribution function hs to the charge distribution at
fixed r by performing a gyroaveraging operation dual to the
ring average defined in Eq. (53):


Z 2π
v⊥ × ẑ
1
, v⊥ , vk .
dφ hs t, r +
hhs (t, Rs , v⊥ , vk )ir =
2π 0
Ωs
(57)
In other words, the velocity-space integrals in Eqs. (54-56)
are performed over hs at constant r, rather than constant Rs .
If we Fourier-transform hs in Rs , the gyroveraging operation
takes a simple mathematical form:
X
heik*Rs ir hsk (t, v⊥ , vk )
hhs ir =
k

=

X

e

k

=

X

ik*r




v⊥ × ẑ
exp ik *
hsk (t, v⊥ , vk )
Ωs
r

eik*r J0 (as )hsk (t, v⊥ , vk ),

(58)

k

where as = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωs and J0 is a Bessel function that arose
from the angle integral in the velocity space. In Eq. (56), an
analogous calculation taking into account the angular dependence of v⊥ leads to
Z
4π X ik*r X
J1 (as )
δBk = −
e
hsk (t, v⊥ , vk ).
d 3 v ms v2⊥
B0
as
s
k
(59)
Note that Eq. (56) [and, therefore, Eq. (59)] is the gyrokinetic equivalent of the perpendicular pressure balance that appeared in § 2 [Eq. (17)]:
X Z
B0
2 B0 δBk
∇⊥
=
∇⊥ *
qs d 3 vhẑ × v⊥ hs ir
4π
c
s


Z
X
v⊥ × ẑ
3 ∂v⊥
, v⊥ , vk
hs t, r +
= ∇⊥ *
Ωs ms d v
∂φ
Ωs
s
XZ
∇ ⊥∇ ⊥ :
∇⊥∇ ⊥ : δP⊥ ,(60)
= −∇
d 3 v ms hv⊥ v⊥ hs ir = −∇
s

where we have integrated by parts with respect to the gyroangle φ and used ∂v⊥ /∂φ = ẑ × v⊥, ∂ 2 v⊥ /∂φ2 = −v⊥ .
Once the fields are determined, they have to be substituted into χ [Eq. (51)] and the result ring averaged [Eq. (53)].
Again, we emphasize that φ, Ak and δBk are functions of r,
while hχiRs is a function of Rs . The transformation is accomplished via a calculation analogous to the one that led to

Eqs. (58) and (59):
X
hχiRs =
eik*Rs hχiRs ,k ,

11

(61)

k



vk Akk
T0s 2v2⊥ J1 (as ) δBkk
+
. (62)
hχiRs ,k = J0 (as ) φk −
c
qs v2ths as B0

The last equation establishes a correspondence between the
Fourier transforms of the fields with respect to r and the
Fourier transform of hχiRs with respect to Rs .
3.4. Generalized Energy
As promised in § 1.2, the central unifying concept of this
paper is now introduced.
If we multiply the gyrokinetic equation (50) by T0s hs /F0s
and integrate over the velocities and gyrocenters, we find that
the nonlinear term conserves the variance of hs and
Z
Z
Z
Z
∂hχiRs
T0s h2s
d
= d 3 v d 3 Rs q s
hs
d 3 v d 3 Rs
dt
2F0s
∂t


Z
Z
T0s hs ∂hs
. (63)
+ d 3 v d 3 Rs
F0s
∂t c

Let us now sum this equation over all species. The first term
on the right-hand side is
Z
X Z
∂hχiRs
hs
q s d 3 v d 3 Rs
∂t
s


Z
X Z
∂χ
3
3
= d r
qs d v
hs
∂t
r
s
"
#
Z
Z
Z
∂φ X
1 ∂A X
3
3
3
= d r
*
qs d vhv hs ir
qs d vhhs ir −
∂t s
c ∂t
s
Z
X q2 φ2 n0s Z
d
s
+ d 3 r E * j,
(64)
d3r
=
dt
2T
0s
s
where we have used Eq. (54) and Ampère's law [Eqs. (5556)] to express the integrals of hs . The second term on the
right-hand side is the total work done on plasma per unit time.
Using Faraday's law [Eq. (33)], it can be written as
Z
Z
|δB|2
d
3
+ Pext ,
(65)
d3r
d rE* j = −
dt
8π
where Pext is the total power injected into the system by the
external energy sources (outer-scale stirring; in terms of the
Kolmogorov energy flux ε used in scaling arguments in § 1.1,
Pext = V mi n0i ε/2, where V is the system volume). Combining
Eqs. (63-65), we find (Howes et al. 2006)
#
"

Z
2
2 2
2
X Z
dW
|δB|
q
φ
n
d
T
hh
i
0s
0s
r
s
+
− s
≡
d3r
d3v
dt
dt
2F0s
2T0s
8π
s


Z
Z
X
T0s hs ∂hs
.
(66)
= Pext +
d 3 v d 3 Rs
F0s
∂t c
s

We will refer to the quantity W as the generalized energy. It
is a positive definite quantity-this becomes explicit if we use
Eq. (54) to express it in terms of the total perturbed distribution function δ fs = −qs φF0s /T0s + hs [see Eq. (47)]:
!
Z
2
2
XZ
|δB|
T
δ
f
0s
s
.
(67)
W = d3r
+
d3v
2F0s
8π
s

12

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

Equation (66) is a conservation law of the generalized energy: Pext is the source and the second term on the right-hand
side, which is negative definite, represents collisional disssipation. This suggests that we might think of kinetic plasma
turbulence in terms of the generalized energy W injected by
the outer-scale stirring and dissipated by collisions. In order for the dissipation to be important, the collisional term in
Eq. (66) has to become comparable to Pext . This can happen
in two ways:
1. at collisional scales (kk λmfpi ∼ 1) due to deviations of
the perturbed distribution function from a local perturbed Maxwellian (see § 6.1 and Appendix D);
2. at collisionless scales (kk λmfpi ≫ 1) due the development of small scales in the velocity space (which is accompanied by the development of small perpendicular
scales in the position space; see § 7.4).
Thus, the dissipation is only important at particular (small)
scales, which are generally well separated from the outer
scale. The generalized energy is transferred from the outer
scale to the dissipation scales via a nonlinear cascade. We
shall refer to this cascade as the kinetic cascade. It is analogous to the energy cascade in fluid or MHD turbulence, but a
conceptually new feature is present: the small scales at which
dissipation happens can be small scales both in the velocity
and position space. How such small scales are accessed will
be discussed in more detail in § 7.4.
In the sections that follow, we shall derive particular forms
of W for various limiting cases of the gyrokinetic theory
(§ 4.7, § 5.6, § 7.3, Appendix D.2). We shall see that the kinetic cascade of W is, indeed, a direct generalization of the
more familiar fluid cascades (such as the RMHD cascades discussed in § 2) and that W contains the energy invariants of the
fluid models in the appropriate limits. In these limits, the cascade of the generalized energy will split into several decoupled cascades, as it did in the case of RMHD (§ 2.5). Whenever one of the physically important scales (§ 1.3) is crossed
and a change of physical regime occurs, these cascades are
mixed back together into the overall kinetic cascade of W ,
which can then be split in a different way as it emerges on the
"opposite side" of the transition region in the scale space. The
conversion of the Alfvénic cascade into the KAW cascade and
the entropy cascade at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 is the most interesting example of such a transition, discussed in § 7.
3.5. Heating and Entropy

In a stationary state, all of the the turbulent power injected
by the external stirring is dissipated and thus transferred into
heat. Mathematically, this is expressed as a slow increase in
the temperature of the Maxwellian equilibrium. In gyrokinetics, the heating time scale is ordered as ∼ (ǫ2 ω)−1 .
Even though the dissipation of turbulent fluctuations may
be occurring "collisionlessly" at scales such that kk λmfpi ≫ 1
(e.g., via wave-particle interaction at the ion gyroscale), the
resulting heating must ultimately be effected with the help of
collisions. This is because heating is an irreversible process
and it is a small amount of collisions that make "collisionless" damping irreversible. In other words, slow heating of the
Maxwellian equilibrium is equivalent to entropy production
and Boltzmann's H-theorem rigorously requires collisions to

make this possible. Indeed, the total entropy of species s is
Z
Z
Ss = − d 3 r d 3 v fs ln fs


Z
Z
δf2
= − d 3 r d 3 v F0s ln F0s + s + O(ǫ3 ), (68)
2F0s
R 3
where we took d r δ fs = 0. It is then not hard to show that


Z
Z
3
1 dT0s dSs
T0s hs ∂hs
,
V n0s
=
= − d 3 v d 3 Rs
2
T0s dt
dt
F0s
∂t c
(69)
where the overlines mean avearging over times longer than
the characteristic time of the turbulent fluctuations ∼ ω −1
but shorter than the typical heating time ∼ (ǫ2 ω)−1 (see
Howes et al. 2006 for a detailed derivation of this and related results on heating in gyrokinetics; an earlier discussion
of the entropy production in gyrokinetics can be found in
Krommes & Hu 1994; Krommes 1999). We have omitted the
term describing the interspecies collisional temperature equalization. Note that both sides of Eq. (69) are order ǫ2 ω.
If we now time average Eq. (66) in a similar fashion, the
left-hand side vanishes because it is a time derivative of a
quantity fluctuating on the time scale ∼ ω −1 and we confirm
that the right-hand side of Eq. (69) is simply equal to the average power Pext injected by external stirring. The import of
Eq. (69) is that it tells us that heating can only be effected
by collisions, while Eq. (66) indicates that the injected power
gets to the collisional scales in velocity and position space by
means of a kinetic cascade of generalized energy. This cascade contains the cascade of entropy: indeed, the first term
inP
the expression for the generalized energy (67) is simply
− s T0s δSs , where δSs is the perturbed entropy [see Eq. (68)].
The contribution to it from the gyrocenter distribution is the
integral of −h2s /2F0s, whose evolution equation (63) can be
viewed as the gyrokinetic version of the H-theorem. The first
term on the right-hand side of this equation represents the
wave-particle interaction. Under time average, it is related
to Pext via Eqs. (64-65) and is balanced by the second term,
which is the collisional-heating, or entropy-production, term
that already appeared in Eq. (69). The entropy cascade to collisional scales will be discussed further in § 7.4 and § 7.5.
This concludes a short primer on gyrokinetics necessary
(and sufficient) for adequate understanding of what is to follow. Formally, all further analytical developments in this paper are simply subsidiary expansions of the gyrokinetics in the
parameters we listed in § 3.1: in § 4, we expand in (me /mi )1/2 ,
in § 5 in k⊥ ρi (followed by further subsidiary expansions in
large and small kk λmfpi in § 6), and in § 7 in 1/k⊥ρi .
4. ISOTHERMAL ELECTRON FLUID

In this section, we carry out an expansion of the electron gyrokinetic equation in powers of (me /mi )1/2 ≃ 0.02 (for hydrogen plasma). In virtually all cases of interest, this expansion
can be done while still considering βi , k⊥ ρi , and kk λmfpi to
be order unity.11 Note that the assumption k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 together
with Eq. (41) mean that
k⊥ ρe ∼ k⊥ ρi (me /mi )1/2 ≪ 1,

(70)

11 One notable exception is the LAPD device at UCLA, where β ∼ 10−4 −
10−3 (due mostly to the electron pressure because the ions are cold, τ ∼ 0.1,
so βi ∼ βe /10; see, e.g., Morales et al. 1999). This interferes with the massratio expansion.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
i.e., the expansion in (me /mi )1/2 means also that we are
considering scales larger than the electron gyroradius. The
idea of such an expansion of the electron kinetic equation
has been utilized many times in plasma physics literature.
The mass-ratio expansion of the gyrokinetic equation in a
form very similar to what is presented below is found in
Snyder & Hammett (2001).
The primary import of this section will be technical: we
shall dispense with the electron gyrokinetic equation and thus
prepare the necessary ground for further approximations. The
main results are summarized in § 4.9. A reader who is only
interested in following qualitatively the major steps in the
derivation may skip to this summary.
4.1. Ordering the Terms in the Kinetic Equation

In view of Eq. (70), ae ≪ 1, so we can expand the Bessel
functions arising from averaging over the electron ring motion:


1
1
J1 (ae ) 1
J0 (ae ) = 1 − a2e + * * * ,
1 − a2e + * * * . (71)
=
4
ae
2
8
Keeping only the lowest-order terms of the above expansions
in Eq. (62) for hχiRe , then subsituting this hχiRe and qe = −e in
the electron gyrokinetic equation, we get the following kinetic
equation for the electrons, accurate up to and including the
first order in (me /mi )1/2 (or in k⊥ ρe ):


vk Ak T0e v2⊥ δBk
∂he c
∂he
+ vk
+
−
φ−
,
h
e
∂t
∂z B0
c
e v2the B0
1

=−

1

0



vk A k
eF0e ∂
φ−
−
T0e ∂t
c
1

0

0

T0e v2⊥
e v2the
1

1


 
δBk
∂he
. (72)
+
B0
∂t c
0

Note that φ, Ak , δBk in Eq. (72) are taken at r = Re . We
have indicated the lowest order to which each of the terms
enters if compared with vk ∂he /∂z. In order to obtain these
estimates, we have assumed that the physical ordering introduced in § 3.1 holds with respect to the subsidiary expansion
in (me /mi )1/2 as well as for the primary gyrokinetic expansion
in ǫ, so we can use Eqs. (3) and (10) to order terms with respect to (me /mi )1/2 . We have also made use of Eqs. (41), (45),
and of the following three relations:
r r
kk vk vthe
βi m i
∼
,
(73)
∼
ω
vA
τ me
r r
(vk /c)Ak vthe δB⊥
1 T0e δB⊥
βi m i
∼
, (74)
∼
∼
φ
ck⊥ φ
k⊥ ρe eφ B0
τ me
p
T0e v2⊥ δBk Z
∼
k
ρ
βi .
(75)
⊥
i
eφ v2the B0
τ
The collision term is estimated to be zeroth order because [see
Eqs. (40), (42)]
√ r
νei
1
τ 3/2 βi mi
.
(76)
∼
ω
Z2
me kk λmfpi

The consequences of other possible orderings of the collision
terms are discussed in § 4.8. We remind the reader that all
dimensionless parameters except kk /k⊥ ∼ ǫ and (me /mi )1/2
are held to be order unity.
(1)
We now let he = h(0)
e + he + . . . and carry out the expansion
to two lowest orders in (me /mi )1/2 .

4.2. Zeroth Order
To zeroth order, the electron kinetic equation is
 (0) 
∂he
eF0e ∂Ak
∇h(0)
,
+
vk b̂ *∇
=
v
k
e
cT0e ∂t
∂t c

13

(77)

where we have assembled the terms in the left-hand side to
take the form of the derivative of the distribution function
along the perturbed magnetic field:
∂ δB⊥
∂
1 
∇=
∇=
b̂ *∇
*∇
+
−
A ,*** .
(78)
∂z B0
∂z B0 k

We now multiply Eq. (77) by h(0)
e /F0e and integrate over v and
r (since we are only retaining lowest-order terms, the distinction between r and Re does not matter here). Since ∇ * B = 0,
the left-hand side vanishes (assuming that all perturbations are
either periodic or vanish at the boundaries) and we get


Z
Z
Z
∂Ak (0)
en0e
h(0) ∂h(0)
e
=−
u = 0.
d3r d3v e
d3r
F0e
∂t c
cT0e
∂t ke
(79)
The right-hand side of this equation is zero because the
electron flow velocity is zero in the zeroth order, u(0)
ke =
R
(1/n0e) d 3 vvk h(0)
=
0.
This
is
a
consequence
of
the
parale
lel Ampére's law [Eq. (55)], which can be written as follows
c
∇ 2 Ak + uki ,
(80)
uke =
4πen0e ⊥
where
Z
X
1
eik*r
d 3 v vk J0 (ai )hik .
(81)
uki =
n
0i
k
The three terms in Eq. (80) can be estimated as follows
r r
u(0)
βi m i
ǫvthe
ke
∼
∼
ǫ,
(82)
vA
vA
τ me
uki
∼ ǫ,
(83)
vA
∇2⊥ Ak
c∇
k ⊥ ρi
(84)
∼ √ ǫ,
4πen0e vA Z βi

where we have used the fundamental ordering (10) of the slow
waves (uki ∼ ǫvA ) and Alfvén waves (δB⊥ ∼ ǫB0 ). Thus, the
two terms in the right-hand side of Eq. (80) are one order of
(me /mi )1/2 smaller than u(0)
ke , which means that to zeroth order,
the parallel Ampère's law is u(0)
ke = 0.
The collision operator in Eq. (79) contains electron-electron
and electron-ion collisions. To lowest order in (me /mi )1/2 ,
the electron-ion collision operator is simply the pitch-angle
scattering operator [see Eq. (B19) in Appendix B and recall
that uki is first order]. Therefore, we may then rewrite Eq. (79)
as follows
Z
Z
h(0)
d 3 r d 3 v e Cee [h(0)
e ]
F0e
 (0) 2
Z
Z
ei
2
∂he
3
3 νD (v) 1 − ξ
= 0.
(85)
− d r d v
F0e
2
∂ξ

Both terms in this expression are negative definite and must,
therefore, vanish individually. This implies that h(0)
e must be
a perturbed Maxwellian distribution with zero mean velocity
(this follows from the proof of Boltzmann's H theorem; see,

14

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

e.g., Lifschitz & Pitaevskii 1981), i.e., the full electron distribution function to zeroth order in the mass-ratio expansion is
[see Eq. (47)]:


me v 2
ne
eφ
, (86)
exp
−
+ h(0)
=
fe = F0e +
3/2
e
T0e
2Te
2πTe /me

where ne = n0e + δne , Te = T0e + δTe . Expanding around the
unperturbed Maxwellian F0e , we get



 2
3 δTe
δne eφ
v
−
h(0)
=
F0e ,
(87)
−
+
e
n0e T0e
v2the 2 T0e

where the fields are taken at r = Re . Now substitute this solution back into Eq. (77). The collision term vanishes and the
remaining equation must be satisfied at arbitrary values of v.
This gives
1 ∂Ak
T0e δne
∇φ = b̂ *∇
∇
,
(88)
+ b̂ *∇
c ∂t
e n0e
δTe
∇
= 0.
(89)
b̂ *∇
T0e

4.3. Flux Conservation
Equation (88) establishes a relation between Ak , φ and δne .
The collision term is neglected because, for h(0)
e given by
Eq. (87), it vanishes to zeroth order. Therefore, Ohmic resistivity is a subdominant effect in the (me /mi )1/2 expansion
and the magnetic-field lines cannot be broken. Indeed, we
may follow Cowley (1985) and argue that the left-hand side
of Eq. (88) is minus the projection of the electric field on
the total magnetic field [see Eq. (33)], so we have E * b̂ =
∇(T0e δne /en0e ); hence the total electric field is
−b̂ *∇



T0e δne
T0e δne
−∇
E = Î − b̂b̂ * E + ∇
(90)
e n0e
e n0e
and Faraday's law becomes
∂B
∇ × E = ∇ × (ueff × B) ,
= −c∇
(91)
∂t


c
T0e δne
ueff = 2 E + ∇
× B,
(92)
B
e n0e
i.e., the magnetic field lines are frozen into the velocity field
ueff . In Appendix C.1, we show that this effective velocity is
the part of the electron flow velocity ue perpendicular to the
total magnetic field B [see Eq. (C9)].
4.4. Isothermal Electrons
Equation (89) mandates that the perturbed electron temperature must remain constant along the perturbed field lines.
Strictly speaking, this does not preclude δTe varying across
the field lines. However, we shall now assume that the field
lines are stochastic and, therefore, δTe = const (has no spatial
variation). Assuming that no spatially uniform perturbations
exist, we may set δTe = 0. Equation (87) then reduces to


δne eφ
(0)
F0e (v),
(93)
−
he =
n0e T0e
or, using Eq. (47),
δne
F0e (v).
(94)
δ fe =
n0e
Hence follows the equation of state for isothermal electrons:
δ pe = T0e δne .
(95)

4.5. First Order
We now subtract Eq. (77) from Eq. (72), integrate the remainder over the velocity space (keeping r constant), and retain first-order terms only. Using Eq. (93), we get




c
δne δBk
∂ δne δBk
+
φ,
−
−
∂t n0e B0
B0
n0e B0


∂uke 1 
cT0e δne δBk
+
= 0, (96)
,
−
Ak , uke +
∂z
B0
eB0 n0e B0
where the parallel electron velocity is first order:
Z
1
=
uke = u(1)
d 3 v vk h(1)
(97)
e .
ke
n0e
The velocity-space integral of the collision term does not enter
because it is subdominant by at least one factor of (me /mi )1/2 :
indeed, as shown in Appendix B.1, the velocity integration
2 2
leads to an extra factor of k⊥
ρe , so that


Z
∂he
1
2 2 δne
∼ νei k⊥
ρe
d3v
n0e
∂t c
n0e
2 2 r
p
me δne
k ρ
ω
, (98)
∼ τ βi ⊥ i
kk λmfpi mi n0e
where we have used Eqs. (41) and (76).
4.6. Field Equations
Using Eq. (93) and qi = Ze, n0e = Zn0i , T0e = T0i /τ , we derive
from the quasineutrality equation (54) [see also Eq. (58)]
Z
Zeφ X ik*r 1
δne δni
e
=
=−
+
d 3 v J0 (ai )hik , (99)
n0e n0i
T0i
n0i
k

and, from the perpendicular part of Ampère's law [Eq. (59),
using also Eq. (99)],


δBk βi
Z Zeφ X ik*r
e
1+
=
−
B0
2
τ
T0i
k

 
Z
2v2⊥ J1 (ai )
Z
1
3
J0 (ai ) + 2
d v
hik . (100)
×
n0i
τ
vthi ai
The parallel electron velocity, uke , is determined from the parallel part of Ampère's law, Eq. (80).
The ion distribution function hi that enters these equations
has to be determined by solving the ion gyrokinetic equation: Eq. (50) with s = i. Note that computing the collision
term ∂hi /∂t c in this equation does not require knowledge
of he because the ion-electron collisions are subdominant in
the (me /mi )1/2 expansion [see Eq. (43)].
4.7. Generalized Energy

The generalized energy (§ 3.4) for the case of isothermal
electrons is calculated by substituting Eq. (94) into Eq. (67):
Z

Z
T0i δ fi2 n0e T0e δn2e |δB|2
W = d3r
d3v
. (101)
+
+
2F0i
2 n20e
8π
4.8. Validity of the Mass-Ratio Expansion

Let us examine the range of spatial scales in which the
equations derived above are valid. In carrying out the expansion in (me /mi )1/2 , we ordered k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 [Eq. (70)] and
kk λmfpi ∼ 1 [Eq. (76)]. Formally, this means that the perpendicular and parallel wavelengths of the perturbations must not
be so small or so large as to interfere with the mass ratio expansion. We now discuss the four conditions that this requirement leads to and whether any of them can be violated without
destroying the validity of the equations derived above.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

15

F IG . 3.- The region of validity in the wave-number space of the secondary approximation-isothermal electrons and gyrokinetic ions (§ 4). It is the region
of validity of the gyrokinetic approximation (Fig. 2) further circumscribed by two conditions: kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 (isothermal electrons) and k⊥ ρe ≪ 1
(magnetized electrons). The region of validity of the strongly magnetized two-fluid theory (Appendix A.2) is also shown. It is the same as for the full two-fluid
theory plus the additional constraint k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi . The region of validity of MHD (or one-fluid theory) is the subset of this with kk λmfpi ≪ (me /mi )1/2
(adiabatic electrons).

4.8.1. k⊥ ρi ≪ (mi /me )1/2 .

This is equivalent to demanding that k⊥ ρe ≪ 1, a condition
that was, indeed, essential for the expansion to hold [Eq. (71)].
This is not a serious limitation because electrons can be considered well magnetized at virtually all scales of interest for
astrophysical applications. However, we do forfeit the detailed information about some important electron physics at
k⊥ ρe ∼ 1: for example such effects as wave damping at the
electron gyroscale and the electron heating (although the total
amount of the electron heating can be deduced by subtracting
the ion heating from the total energy input). The breaking of
the flux conservation (resistivity) is also an effect that requires
incorporation of the finite electron gyroscale physics.
4.8.2. k⊥ ρi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 .

If this condition is broken, the small-k⊥ ρi expansion, carried out in § 5, must, formally speaking, precede the massratio expansion. However, it turns out that the smallk⊥ ρi expansion commutes with the mass-ratio expansion
(Schekochihin et al. 2007a, see also footnote 13), so we
may use the equations derived in §§ 4.2-4.6 when k⊥ ρi .
(me /mi )1/2 .
4.8.3. kk λmfpi ≪ (mi /me )1/2 .

Let us consider what happens if this condition is broken
and kk λmfpi & (mi /me )1/2 . In this case, the collisions become even weaker and the expansion precedure must be modified. Namely, the collision term picks up one extra order of
(me /mi )1/2 , so it is first order in Eq. (72). To zeroth order,
the electron kinetic equation no longer contains collisions: in-

stead of Eq. (77), we have
eF0e ∂Ak
.
(102)
cT0e ∂t
We may seek the solution of this equation in the form h(0)
e =
H(t, Re )F0e + h̃, where H(t, Re ) is an unknown function to be
determined and h̃ is the homogeneous solution satisfying
∇h(0)
vk b̂ *∇
e = vk

∇h̃ = 0,
b̂ *∇

(103)

i.e., h̃ must be constant along the perturbed magnetic field.
This is a generalization of Eq. (89). Again assuming stochastic field lines, we conclude that h̃ is independent of space. If
we rule out spatially uniform perturbations, we may set h̃ = 0.
The unknown function H(t, Re ) is readily expressed in terms
of δne and φ:
Z
δne eφ
δne eφ 1
=
+
−
, (104)
d 3 vh(0)
⇒ H=
e
n0e T0e n0e
n0e T0e
so h(0)
e is again given by Eq. (93), so the equations derived
in §§ 4.2-4.6 are unaltered. Thus, the mass-ratio expansion
remains valid at kk λmfpi & (mi /me )1/2 .
4.8.4. kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 .

If the parallel wavelength of the fluctuations is so long that
this is violated, kk λmfpi . (me /mi )1/2 , the collision term in
Eq. (72) is minus first order. This is the lowest-order term in
the equation. Setting it to zero obliges h(0)
e to be a perturbed
Maxwellian again given by Eq. (87). Instead of Eq. (77), the
zeroth-order kinetic equation is
 (1) 
eF0e ∂Ak
∂he
∇h(0)
.
(105)
vk b̂ *∇
=
v
+
k
e
cT0e ∂t
∂t c

16

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

Now the collision term in this order contains h(1)
e , which
can be determined from Eq. (105) by inverting the collision operator. This sets up a perturbation theory that in due
course leads to the Reduced MHD version of the general
MHD equations-this is what was considered in § 2. Equation (89) no longer needs to hold, so the electrons are not
isothermal. In this true one-fluid limit, both electrons and
ions are adiabatic with equal temperatures [see Eq. (107) below]. The collisional transport terms in this limit (parallel
and perpendicular resistivity, viscosity, heat fluxes, etc.) were
calculated [starting not from gyrokinetics but from the general Vlasov–Landau equation (32)] in exhaustive detail by
Braginskii (1965). His results and the way RMHD emerges
from them are reviewed in Appendix A.
In physical terms, the electrons can no longer be isothermal
if the parallel electron diffusion time becomes longer than the
characteristic time of the fluctuations (the Alfvén time):
r
me
1
1
1
&
⇔ kk λmfpi . √
. (106)
kk vA
vthe λmfpi kk2
βi m i
Furthermore, under a similar condition, electron and ion temperatures must equalize: this happens if the ion-electron collision time is shorter than the Alfvén time,
p r me
1
1
.
⇔ kk λmfpi . βi
(107)
νie
kk vA
mi
(see Lithwick & Goldreich 2001 for a discussion of these conditions in application to the ISM).
4.9. Summary
The original gyrokinetic description introduced in § 3 was
a system of two kinetic equations [Eq. (50)] that evolved the
electron and ion distribution functions he , hi and three field
equations [Eqs. (54-56)] that related φ, Ak and δBk to he and
hi . In this section, we have taken advantage of the smallness
of the electron mass to treat the electrons as an isothermal
magnetized fluid, while ions remained fully gyrokinetic.
In mathematical terms, we solved the electron kinetic equation and replaced the gyrokinetics with a simpler closed system of equations that evolve 6 unknown functions: φ, Ak , δBk ,
δne , uke and hi . These satisfy two fluid-like evolution equations (88) and (96), three integral relations (99), (100), and
(80) which involve hi , and the kinetic equation (50) for hi .
The system is simpler because the full electron distribution
function has been replaced by two scalar fields δne and uke .
We now summarize this new system of equations: denoting
ai = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωi , we have
T0e δne
1 ∂Ak
∇φ = b̂ *∇
∇
,
(108)
+ b̂ *∇
c ∂t
e n0e




cT0e δne δBk
d δne δBk
∇uke = −
+ b̂ *∇
,(109)
−
,
dt n0e B0
eB0 n0e B0
Z
δne
Zeφ X ik*r 1
e
=−
+
d 3 v J0 (ai )hik ,
(110)
n0e
T0i
n
0i
k


δBk βi
Z Zeφ X ik*r
e
1+
=
−
B0
2
τ
T0i
k
 

Z
1
2v2⊥ J1 (ai )
Z
3
(111)
×
hik ,
J0 (ai ) + 2
d v
n0i
τ
vthi ai
Z
X
c
1
∇2⊥ Ak +
uke =
eik*r
d 3 v vk J0 (ai )hik , (112)
4πen0e
n0i
k

and Eq. (50) for s = i and ion-ion collisions only:
∂hi
Ze ∂hχiRi
∂hi c
+ vk
+ {hχiRi , hi } =
F0i + hCii [hi ]iRi ,
∂t
∂z B0
T0i ∂t
(113)
where hCii [. . . ]iRi is the gyrokinetic ion-ion collision operator (see Appendix B) and the ion-electron collisions have
been neglected to lowest order in (me /mi )1/2 [see Eq. (43)].
Note that Eqs. (108-109) have been written in a compact form,
where
∂
∂
c
d
∇=
(114)
=
+ uE *∇
+ {φ, * * *}
dt ∂t
∂t B0
is the convective derivative with respect to the E × B drift ve∇⊥ φ × ẑ/B0 , and
locity, uE = −c∇
∇=
b̂ *∇

∂
1 
∂ δB⊥
∇=
*∇
+
−
Ak , * * *
∂z B0
∂z B0

(115)

is the gradient along the total magnetic field (mean field plus
perturbation).
The generalized energy conserved by Eqs. (108-113) is
given by Eq. (101).
It is worth observing that the left-hand side of Eq. (108)
is simply minus the component of the electric field along the
total magnetic field [see Eq. (33)]. This was used in § 4.3 to
prove that the magnetic flux described by Eq. (108) is exactly
conserved. Equation (108) is the projection of the generalized
Ohm's law onto the total magnetic field-the right-hand side
of this equation is the so-called thermoelectric term. This is
discussed in more detail in Appendix C.1, where we also show
that Eq. (109) is the parallel part of Faraday's law and give a
qualitative nongyrokinetic derivation of Eqs. (108-109).
We will refer to Eqs. (108-113) as the equations of isothermal electron fluid. They are valid in a broad range of scales:
the only constraints are that kk ≪ k⊥ (gyrokinetic ordering, § 3.1), k⊥ ρe ≪ 1 (electrons are magnetized, § 4.8.1) and
kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2 (electrons are isothermal, § 4.8.4). The
region of validity of Eqs. (108-113) in the wave-number space
is illustrated in Fig. 3. A particular advantage of this hybrid
fluid-kinetic system is that it is uniformly valid across the
transition from magnetized to unmagnetized ions (i.e., from
k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 to k⊥ ρi ≫ 1).
5. TURBULENCE IN THE INERTIAL RANGE: KINETIC RMHD

Our goal in this section is to derive a reduced set of equations that describe the magnetized plasma in the limit of small
k⊥ ρi . Before we proceed with an expansion in k⊥ ρi , we need
to make a formal technical step, the usefulness of which will
become clear shortly. A reader with no patience for this or
any of the subsequent technical developments may skip to the
summary at the end of this section (§ 5.7).
5.1. A Technical Step
Let us formally split the ion gyrocenter distribution function
into two parts:


Ze
v ⊥ * A⊥
hi =
φ−
F0i + g
T0i
c
Ri


X
Zeφk 2v2⊥ J1 (ai ) δBkk
F0i + g. (116)
+ 2
eik*Ri J0 (ai )
=
Ti
vthi ai B0
k

Then g satisfies the following equation, obtained by substituting Eq. (116) and the expression for ∂Ak /∂t that follows from

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
Eq. (108) into the ion gyrokinetic equation (113):

for the gyrokinetics in § 3.1 holds also for the subsidiary expansion in k⊥ ρi . First note that, in view of Eq. (45), we must
regard Zeφ/Ti to be minus first order:

∂g c
∂g
{hχiRi , g} − hCii [g]iRi =
+ vk +
∂t
∂z B0
0

Ze
− vk
T0i

*

Zeφ
ǫ
√ .
∼
Ti
k ⊥ ρ i βi

1 
Ak , φ − hφiRi
B0

∇
+ b̂ *∇

T0e δne
−
e n0e

v ⊥ * A⊥
c

 !+

(vk /c)Ak vthi δB⊥
1 Ti δB⊥ p
∼ βi , (125)
∼
∼
φ
ck⊥ φ
k⊥ ρi Zeφ B0

F0i

Ri

Ri

Ri

+

0

Ze
+
T0i

*

Cii



v ⊥ * A⊥
φ−
c
1

0



F0i

.

(117)

Ri

The field equations (110-111) rewritten in terms of g are
 Zeφk
δBkk 
δnke
− Γ1 (αi )
+ 1 − Γ0(αi )
n0e
B0
T0i
0

0

1
c
k2 Akk =
4πen0e ⊥
n0i

0

1

uk
u⊥
ǫ
g
∼
∼
∼√ ,
F0i
vthi
vthi
βi

Z

1
n0i

Z

d 3 v J0 (ai )gk ,

(118)

0

d 3 v vk J0 (ai )gk = ukki ,

(119)

0

 Zeφk
2 δBkk 
Z δnke
+ Γ2 (αi ) +
− 1 − Γ1(αi )
τ n0e
βi B 0
T0i
0



so φ and (vk /c)Ak are same order.
Since uk = uki (electrons do not contribute to the mass flow),
assuming that slow waves and Alfvén waves have comparable
energies implies uki ∼ u⊥ . As uki is determined by the second
equality in Eq. (119), we can order g [using Eq. (10)]:
(126)

1

=

ukke +

(124)

Also, as δB⊥ /B0 ∼ ǫ [Eq. (10)],

1



17

0



=−

1

1
n0i

Z

d3v

2v2⊥
v2thi
0

J1 (ai )
gk , (120)
ai

2 2
where αi = k⊥
ρi /2 and we have defined
Z
1
d 3 v [J0 (ai )]2 F0i
Γ0 (αi ) =
n0i
(121)
= I0 (αi ) e−αi = 1 − αi + * * * ,
Z
2
1
2v
J1 (ai )
F0i = −Γ′0 (αi )
Γ1 (αi ) =
d 3 v 2⊥ J0 (ai )
n0i
ai
vthi
3
= [I0 (αi ) − I1(αi )] e−αi = 1 − αi + * * * ,
(122)
2
2
 2
Z
1
2v⊥ J1 (ai )
Γ2 (αi ) =
F0i = 2Γ1 (αi ). (123)
d3v
n0i
v2thi ai

Underneath each term in Eqs. (117-120), we have indicated
the lowest order in k⊥ ρi to which this term enters.
5.2. Subsidiary Ordering in k⊥ ρi

In order to carry out a subsidiary expansion in small k⊥ ρi ,
we must order all terms in Eqs. (88-96) and (117-120) with respect to k⊥ ρi . Let us again assume, like we did when expanding the electron equation (§ 4), that the ordering introduced

so g is zeroth order in k⊥ ρi . Similarly, δne /n0e ∼ δBk /B0 ∼ ǫ
are zeroth order in k⊥ ρi -this follows directly from Eq. (10).
Together with Eq. (3), the above considerations allow us to
order all terms in our equations. The ordering of the collision
term involving φ is explained in Appendix B.2.

5.3. Alfvén Waves: Kinetic Derivation of RMHD
We shall now show that the RMHD equations (13-14) hold
in this approximation. There is a simple correspondence between the stream and flux functions defined in Eq. (12) and
the electromagnetic potentials φ and Ak :

Φ=

c
φ,
B0

Ψ = −√

Ak
.
4πmi n0i

(127)

The first of these definitions says that the perpendicular flow
velocity u⊥ is the E × B drift velocity; the second definition
is the standard MHD relation between the magnetic flux function and the parallel component of of the vector potential.
Deriving Eq. (13) is straightforward: in Eq. (88), we retain
only the lowest-minus first-order terms (those that contain
φ and Ak ). The result is
∂Ak
∂φ c 
+c
−
Ak , φ = 0.
∂t
∂z B0

(128)

Using
√ Eq. (127) and the definition of the Alfvén speed, vA =
B0 / 4πmi n0i , we get Eq. (13). By the argument of § 4.3,
Eq. (128) expresses the fact that that magnetic-field lines are
frozen into the E × B velocity field, which is the mean flow
velocity associated with the Alfvén waves (see § 5.4).
As we are about to see, in order to derive Eq. (132), we
have to separate the first-order part of the k⊥ ρi expansion. The
easiest way to achieve this, is to integrate Eq. (117) over the
velocity space (keeping r constant) and expand the resulting
equation in small k⊥ ρi . Using Eqs. (118) and (119) to express

18

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

the velocity-space integrals of g, we get


 Zeφk ∂ δnke
δBkk
∂
1 − Γ0(αi )
+
− Γ1 (αi )
∂t
T0i
∂t n0e
B0
1

(129)

0



∂
c
2
+
ukke +
k⊥
Akk
∂z
4πen0e
0

1
=
n0i

Z

3

+

c 1
B0 n0i

*



d v J0 (ai ) Cii

Z


1

d 3 v J0 (ai ) {hχiRi , g}k
0

v ⊥ * A⊥
Ze
φ−
T0i
c
3

2



F0i + g

Ri

+

2

.
Ri ,k

Underneath each term, the lowest order in k⊥ ρi to which it
enters is shown. We see that terms containing φ are all first
order, so it is up to this order that we shall retain terms. The
collision term integrated over the velocity space picks up two
extra orders of k⊥ ρi (see Appendix B.1), so it is second order and can, therefore, be dropped. As a consequence of
quasineutrality, the zeroth-order part of the above equation exactly coincides with Eq. (96), i.e, δni /n0i = δne /n0e satisfy the
same equation. Indeed, neglecting second-order terms (but
not first-order ones!), the nonlinear term in Eq. (129) (the last
term on the left-hand side) is




Z
Z
1
1
c
1
φ,
Ak ,
d3v g −
d 3 v vk g
B0
n0i
B0
n0i


Z
2
cT0i δBk 1
3 v⊥
,
d v 2 g , (130)
+
ZeB0 B0 n0i
vthi
and, using Eqs. (118-120) to express velocity-space integrals
of g in the above expression, we find that the zeroth-order part
of the nonlinearity is the same as the nonlinearity in Eq. (96),
while the first-order part is




1
1
c
Zeφ
c
φ, ρ2i ∇2⊥
+
Ak ,
∇2⊥ Ak , (131)
−
B0
2
T0i
B0
4πen0e
where we have used the expansion (121) of Γ0 (αi ) and converted it back into x space.
Thus, if we subtract Eq. (96) from Eq. (129), the remainder
is first order and reads 

∂ 1 2 2 Zeφ c
1 2 2 Zeφ
+
ρ∇
φ, ρi ∇⊥
∂t 2 i ⊥ T0i B0
2
T0i


c
c
1
∂
2
2
Ak ,
∇ Ak −
∇ Ak = 0. (132)
+
∂z 4πen0e ⊥
B0
4πen0e ⊥
Multiplying Eq. (132) by 2T0i /Zeρ2i and using Eq. (127), we
get the second RMHD equation (14).
We have established that the Alfvén-wave component of the
turbulence is decoupled and fully described by the RMHD
equations (13) and (14). This result is the same as that in
§ 2.2 but now we have proven that collisions do not affect the
Alfvén waves and that a fluid-like description only requires
k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 to be valid.
5.4. Why Alfvén Waves Ignore Collisions
Let us write explicitly the distribution function of the ion
gyrocenters [Eq. (116)] to two lowest orders in k⊥ ρi :
v2 δBk
Ze
hφiRi F0i + 2⊥
F0i + g + * * * ,
(133)
hi =
T0i
vthi B0

2 2
where, up to corrections of order k⊥
ρi , the ring-averaged
scalar potential is hφiRi = φ(Ri ), the scalar potential taken at
the position of the ion gyrocenter. Note that in Eq. (133), the
first term is minus first order in k⊥ ρi [see Eq. (124)], the second and third terms are zeroth order [Eq. (126)], and all terms
of first and higher orders are omitted. In order to compute the
full ion distribution function given by Eq. (47), we have to
convert hi to the r space. Keeping terms up to zeroth order,
we get


v⊥ × ẑ
Ze
Ze
Ze
∇φ(r) + * * *
φ(r) +
hφiRi ≃
φ(Ri ) =
*∇
T0i
T0i
T0i
Ωi
Ze
2v⊥ * uE
=
φ(r) +
+ ...,
(134)
T0i
v2thi

∇φ(r) × ẑ/B0 , the E × B drift velocity. Subwhere uE = −c∇
stituting Eq. (134) into Eq. (133) and then Eq. (133) into
Eq. (47), we find
fi = F0i +

2v⊥ * uE
v2⊥ δBk
F0i + g + * * * .
F
+
0i
v2thi
v2thi B0

(135)

The first two terms can be combined into a Maxwellian
with mean perpendicular flow velocity u⊥ = uE . These are
the terms responsible for the Alfvén waves. The remaining
terms, which we shall denote δ f ̃i , are the perturbation of the
Maxwellian in the moving frame of the Alfvén waves-they
describe the passive component of the turbulence (see § 5.5).
Thus, the ion distribution function is
#
"
(v⊥ − uE )2 + v2k
n0i
+ δ f ̃i .
(136)
fi =
exp −
vthi
(πv2thi )3/2
This sheds some light on the indifference of Alfvén waves
to collisions: Alfvénic perturbations do not change the
Maxwellian character of the ion distribution. Unlike in a neutral fluid or gas, where viscosity arises when particles transport the local mean momentum a distance ∼ λmfpi , the particles in a magnetized plasma instantaneously take on the local E × B velocity (they take a cyclotron period to adjust, so,
roughly speaking, ρi plays the role of the mean free path).
Thus, there is no memory of the mean perpendicular motion
and, therefore, no perpendicular momentum transport.
Some readers may find it illuminating to notice that
Eq. (132) can be interpreted as stating simply ∇ *j = 0: the first
two terms represent the divergence of the polarization current,
which is perpendicular to the magnetic field;12 the last two
terms are b̂ * ∇ jk . No contribution to the current arises from
the collisional term in Eq. (129) as ion-ion collisions cause no
particle transport.
5.5. Density and Magnetic-Field-Strength Fluctuations

The equations that describe the density (δne ) and magneticfield-strength (δBk ) fluctuations follow immediately from
12 The polarization-drift velocity is formally higher-order than u in the
E
gyrokinetic expansion. However, since uE does not produce any current,
the lowest-order contribution to the perpendicular current comes from the
polarization drift. The higher-order contributions to the gyrocenter distribution function did not need to be calculated explicitly because the information
about the polarization charge is effectively carried by the quasineutrality condition (54). We do not dwell on this point because, in our approach, the notion
of polarization charge is only ever brought in for interpretative purposes, but
is not needed to carry out calculations. For further qualitative discussion of
the role of the polarization charge and polarization drift in gyrokinetics, we
refer the reader to Krommes 2006 and references therein.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
Eqs. (117-120) if only zeroth-order terms are kept. In these
equations, terms that involve φ and Ak also contain factors
2 2
∼ k⊥
ρi and are, therefore, first-order [with the exception of
the nonlinearity on the left-hand side of Eq. (117)]. The fact
that hCii [hφiRi F0i ]iRi in Eq. (117) is first order is proved in Appendix B.2. Dropping these terms along with all other contributions of order higher than zeroth and making use of Eq. (62)
to write out hχiRi , we find that Eq. (117) takes the form
 


Z δne v2⊥ δBk
dg
∇ g+
F0i
+ 2
+ vk b̂ *∇
dt
τ n0e vthi B0
 

v2⊥ δBk
= Cii g + 2
F0i
, (137)
vthi B0
Ri
where we have used definitions (114-115) of the convective
time derivative d/dt and the total gradient along the magnetic
field b̂ * ∇ to write our equation in a compact form. Note
that, in view of the correspondence between Φ, Ψ and φ, Ak
[Eq. (127)], these nonlinear derivatives are the same as those
defined in Eqs. (15-16). The collision term in the right-hand
side of the above equation is the zeroth-order limit of the gyrokinetic ion-ion collision operator: a useful model form of it
is given in Appendix B.3 [Eq. (B17)].
To zeroth order, Eqs. (118-120) are
Z
δne δBk 1
−
=
d 3 v g,
(138)
n0e B0 n0i
Z
1
uk =
d 3 v vk g,
(139)
n0i


Z
1 δBk
1
v2
Z δne
+2 1+
=−
d 3 v 2⊥ g. (140)
τ n0e
βi B 0
n0i
vthi
Note that uk is not an independent quantity-it can be computed from the ion distribution but is not needed for the determination of the latter.
Equations (137-140) evolve the ion distribution function
g, the "slow-wave quantities" uk , δBk , and the density fluctuations δne . The nonlinearities in Eq. (137), contained in
d/dt and b̂ * ∇ , involve the Alfvén-wave quantities Φ and Ψ
(or, equivalently, φ and Ak ) determined separately and independently by the RMHD equations (13-14). The situation
is qualitatively similar to that in MHD (§ 2.3), except now
a kinetic description is necessary-Eqs. (137-140) replace
Eqs. (20-22)-and the nonlinear scattering/mixing of the slow
waves and the entropy mode by the Alfvén waves takes the
form of passive advection of the distribution function g. The
density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations are velocityspace moments of g.
Another way to understand the passive nature of the kinetic
component of the turbulence discussed above is to think of
it as the perturbation of a local Maxwellian equilibrium associated with the Alfvén waves. Indeed, in § 5.4, we split
the full ion distribution function [Eq. (136)] into such a local
Maxwellian and its perturbation
δ f ̃i = g +

v2⊥ δBk
F0i .
v2thi B0

(141)

It is this perturbation that contains all the information about
the passive component; the second term in the above expression enforces to lowest order the conservation of the first
adiabatic invariant μi = mi v2⊥ /2B. In terms of the function
(141), Eqs. (137-140) take a somewhat more compact form

19

(cf. Schekochihin et al. 2007a):




 
d
v2 δBk
Z δne
∇ δ f ̃i +
δ f ̃i − 2⊥
+vk b̂*∇
F0i = Cii δ f ̃i Ri ,
dt
τ n0e
vthi B0
(142)
Z
δne 1
=
d 3 v δ f ̃i ,
n0e n0i


Z
δBk
βi 1
Z v2⊥
3
=−
+
d v
δ f ̃i .
B0
2 n0i
τ v2thi

(143)
(144)

5.6. Generalized Energy: Three KRMHD Cascades

The generalized energy (§ 3.4) in the limit k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 is calculated by substituting into Eq. (101) the perturbed ion distribution function δ fi = 2v⊥ * uE F0i /v2thi + δ f ̃i [see Eqs. (135)
and (141)]. After performing velocity integration, we get

Z
mi n0i u2E δB2⊥
3
+
W= d r
2
8π
!#
Z
2
 ̃2
n0i T0i Z δn2e 2 δBk 1
3 T0i δ f i
+
+
+
d v
2
τ n20e βi B20 n0i
2F0i
= WAW + Wcompr .

(145)

We see that the kinetic energy of the Alfvénic fluctuations
has emerged from the ion entropy part of the generalized energy. The first two terms in Eq. (145) are the total (kinetic
plus magnetic) energy of the Alfvén waves, denoted WAW . As
we learned from § 5.3, it cascades independently of the rest
of the generalized energy, Wcompr , which contains the passive
(compressive) component of the turbulence (§ 5.5) and is the
invariant conserved by Eqs. (142-144) (see Appendix D.2 for
its form in the fluid limit).
In terms of the potentials used in our discussion of RMHD
in § 2, we have
Z

mi n0i
∇ Φ|2 + |∇
∇Ψ|2
|∇
WAW = d 3 r
2
Z

m
i n0i
∇ ζ + |2 + |∇
∇ζ − |2 = W⊥+ + W⊥− , (146)
= d3r
|∇
2

where W⊥+ and W⊥− are the energies of the "+" and "−" waves
[Eq. (27)], which, as we know from § 2.4, cascade by scattering off each other but without exchanging energy.
Thus, the kinetic cascade in the limit k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 is split, independently of the collisionality, into three cascades: of W⊥+ ,
W⊥− and Wcompr .
5.7. Summary

In § 4, gyrokinetics was reduced to a hybrid fluid-kinetic
system by means of an expansion in the electron mass, which
was valid for k⊥ ρe ≪ 1. In this section, we have further restricted the scale range by taking k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 and as a result have
been able to achieve a further reduction in the complexity of
the kinetic theory describing the turbulent cascades. The reduced theory derived here evolves 5 unknown functions: Φ,
Ψ, δBk , δne and g. The stream and flux functions, Φ and Ψ
are related to the fluid quantities (perpendicular velocity and
magnetic field perturbations) via Eq. (12) and to the electromagnetic potentials φ, Ak via Eq. (127). They satisfy a closed
system of equations, Eqs. (13-14), which describe the decoupled cascade of Alfvén waves. These are the same equations
that arise from the MHD approximations, but we have now

20

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

proven that their validity does not depend on the assumption
of high collisionality (the fluid limit) and extends to scales
well below the mean free path, but above the ion gyroscale.
The physical reasons for this are explained in § 5.4. The density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations (the "compressive" fluctuations, or the slow waves and the entropy mode in
the MHD limit) now require a kinetic description in terms of
the ion distribution function g [or δ f ̃i , Eq. (141)], evolved by
the kinetic equation (137) [or Eq. (142)]. The kinetic equation
contains δne and δBk , which are, in turn calculated in terms
of the velocity-space integrals of g via Eqs. (138) and (140)
[or Eqs. (143) and (144)]. The nonlinear evolution (turbulent
cascade) of g, δBk and δne is due solely to passive advection
of g by the Alfvén-wave turbulence.
Let us summarize the new set of equations:
∂Ψ
∇Φ,
= vA b̂ *∇
∂t
d 2
∇∇2⊥ Ψ,
∇ Φ = vA b̂ *∇
dt ⊥
 


Z δne v2⊥ δBk
dg
∇ g+
F0i
+
+ vk b̂ *∇
dt
τ n0e v2thi B0
 

v2 δBk
= Cii g + 2⊥
,
F0i
vthi B0
Ri

(147)
(148)

(149)

−1 Z


 2
1
1
Z
δne
v
=−
+2 1+
d 3 v 2⊥
n0e
τ
βi
n0i
v
 thi 
1
g, (150)
−2 1 +
βi

−1 Z


 2
δBk
1
1
Z
v⊥ Z
3
g, (151)
=−
+2 1+
d v
+
B0
τ
βi
n0i
v2thi τ

hybrid fluid-kinetic description of low-frequency turbulence
in strongly magnetized weakly collisional plasma that is uniformly valid at all scales satisfying k⊥ ρi ≪ min(1, kk λmfpi )
(ions are strongly magnetized)14 and kk λmfpi ≫ (me /mi )1/2
(electrons are isothermal), as illustrated in Fig. 1. Therefore,
it smoothly connects the collisional and collisionless regimes
and is the appropriate theory for the study of the turbulent cascades in the inertial range. It does not, however, describe what
happens to these cascades at or below the ion gyroscale-we
shall move on to these scales in § 7, but first we would like to
discuss the turbulent cascades of density and magnetic-fieldstrength fluctuations and their damping by collisional and collisionless mechanisms.
6. COMPRESSIVE FLUCTUATIONS WITH AND WITHOUT
COLLISIONS

Here we first derive the (nonlinear) equations that govern
the evolution of the density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations in the collisional (kk λmfpi ≪ 1, § 6.1) and collisionless (kk λmfpi ≫ 1, § 6.2) limits and discuss the linear damping
that these fluctuations undergo in the two limits. As in previous sections, an impatient reader may skip to § 6.3 where the
results of the previous two subsections are summarized and
the implications for the structure of the turbulent cascades of
the density and field-strength fluctuations are discussed.
6.1. Collisional Regime

In the collisional regime, kk λmfpi ≪ 1, the fluid limit is recovered by expanding Eqs. (147-151) in small kk λmfpi . The
calculation that is necessary to achieve this is done in Appendix D (see also Appendix A.4). The result is a closed set
of three fluid equations that evolve δBk , δne and uk :
d δne
d δBk
∇ uk +
= b̂ *∇
,
dt B0
dt n0e

δBk
duk 2
∇
∇ b̂ *∇
∇ uk ,
+ νki b̂ *∇
= vA b̂ *∇
dt
B0


d δTi 2 d δne
δTi
∇ b̂ *∇
∇
,
=
+ κki b̂ *∇
dt T0i 3 dt n0e
T0i

where
d
∂
=
+ {Φ, * * *} ,
dt ∂t

∂
1
∇=
b̂ *∇
+ {Ψ, * * *} . (152)
∂z vA

An explicit form of the collision term in the right-hand side of
Eq. (149) is provided in Appendix B.3 [Eq. (B17)].
Equations (147-151) conserve the generalized energy given
by Eq. (145). The kinetic cascade is split, with the Alfvénic
cascade proceding independently of the compressive fluctuations.
As already noted above, the decoupling of the Alfvénic cascade is manifested by Eqs. (147-148) forming a closed subset.
We have already noted in § 4.9 that Eq. (147) is the component
of Ohm's law along the total magnetic field, B * E = 0. Equation (148) can be interpreted as the evolution equation for the
vorticity of the perpendicular plasma flow velocity, which is
the E × B drift velocity.
We shall refer to the system of equations (147-151) as Kinetic Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (KRMHD).13 It is a
13 The term is introduced by analogy with a popular fluid-kinetic system
known as Kinetic MHD, or KMHD (see Kulsrud 1964, 1983). KMHD is derived for magnetized plasmas (ρi ≪ λmfpi ) under the assumption that kρs ≪ 1
and ω ≪ Ωs but without assuming either strong anisotropy (kk ≪ k⊥ ) or
small fluctuations (|δB| ≪ B0 ). The KRMHD equations (147-151) can be
recovered from KMHD by applying to it the RMHD ordering (10) and an expansion in (me /mi )1/2 (Schekochihin et al. 2007a). This means that the k⊥ ρi
expansion (§ 5), which for KMHD is the primary expansion, commutes with
the gyrokinetic expansion (§ 3) and the (me /mi )1/2 expansion (§ 4), both of
which preceded it in this paper.

(153)
(154)
(155)

where




Z δne
δTi 2 δBk
1
∇uk , (156)
1+
=−
−
+ 2 νki b̂ *∇
τ n0e
T0i βi B0 3vA
and νki and κki are the coefficients of parallel ion viscosity
and thermal diffusivity, respectively. The viscous and thermal diffusion are anisotropic because plasma is magnetized,
λmfpi ≫ ρi (Braginskii 1965). The method of calculation of
νki and κki is explained in Appendix D.3. Here we shall ignore numerical prefactors of order unity and give order-ofmagnitude values for these coefficients:
νki ∼ κki ∼

v2thi
∼ vthi λmfpi .
νii

(157)

If we set νki = κki = 0, Eqs. (153-156) are the same as the
RMHD equations of § 2 with the sound speed defined as
s 
 r
βi Z 5
ZT0e 5 T0i
=
+
.
(158)
+
cs = vA
2 τ 3
mi
3 mi
14

The condition k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi must be satisfied because in our estimates of the collision terms (Appendix B.2) we took k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 while assuming that kk λmfpi ∼ 1.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
This is the natural definition of cs for the case of adiabatic
ions, whose specific heat ratio is γi = 5/3, and isothermal electrons, whose specific heat ratio is γe = 1 [because δ pe = T0e δne ;
see Eq. (95)]. Note that Eq. (156) is equivalent to the pressure
balance [Eq. (17) of § 2] with p = ni Ti + ne Te and δ pe = T0e δne .
As in § 2, the fluctuations described by Eqs. (153-156) separate into the zero-frequency entropy mode and the left- and
right-propagating slow waves with
kk vA
ω = ±p
1 + v2A /c2s

(159)

[see Eq. (25)]. All three are cascaded independently of each
other via nonlinear interaction with the Alfvén waves [in Appendix D.2, we show that the generalized energy Wcompr for
this system, given in § 5.6, splits into the three familiar invariants Wk+ , Wk− , and Ws , defined by Eqs. (28-29)].
The diffusion terms add dissipation to the equations. Because diffusion occurs along the field lines of the total magnetic field (mean field plus perturbation), the diffusive terms
are nonlinear and the dissipation process also involves interaction with the Alfvén waves. We can estimate the characteristic
parallel scale at which the diffusion terms become important
by balancing the nonlinear cascade time and the typical diffusion time:
p
kk vA ∼ vthi λmfpi kk2 ⇔ kk λmfpi ∼ 1/ βi , (160)

where we have used Eq. (157).
Technically speaking, the cutoff given by Eq. (160) always
lies in the range of kk that is outside the region of validity
of the small-kk λmfpi expansion adopted in the derivation of
Eqs. (153-155). In fact, in the low-beta limit, the collisional
cutoff falls manifestly in the collisionless scale range, i.e.,
the collisional (fluid) approximation breaks down before the
slow-wave and entropy cascades are damped and one must use
the collisionless (kinetic) limit to calculate the damping (see
§ 6.2). The situation is different in the high-beta limit: in this
case, the expansion in small kk λmfpi can be reformulated as an
√
expansion in small 1/ βi and the cutoff falls within the range
of validity of the fluid approximation. Equations (153-155) in
this limit are
d δBk
∇ uk ,
= b̂ *∇
dt B0

δBk
duk 2
∇
∇ b̂ *∇
∇ uk ,
+ νki b̂ *∇
= vA b̂ *∇
dt
B0


d δne
1 + Z/τ
δne
∇ b̂ *∇
∇
.
=
κki b̂ *∇
dt n0e 5/3 + Z/τ
n0e

(161)
(162)
(163)

As in § 2 [Eq. (30)], the density fluctuations [Eq. (163)] have
decoupled from the slow waves [Eqs. (161-162)]. The former
are damped by thermal diffusion, the latter by viscosity. The
corresponding linear dispersion relations are
1 + Z/τ
κki kk2 ,
5/3 + Z/τ
s


2
νki kk 2 νki kk
.
−i
ω = ±kk vA 1 −
2vA
2

ω = −i

(164)
(165)

Equation (164) describes strong diffusive damping of the density fluctuations. The slow-wave dispersion relation (165) has
two distinct regimes:

21

1. When kk < 2vA /νki , it describes damped slow waves.
√
In particular, in the limit kk λmfpi ≪ 1/ βi , we have
ω ≃ ±kk vA − i

νki kk2
2

.

(166)

2. For kk > 2vA /νki , both solutions become purely imaginary, so the slow waves are converted into aperiodic
decaying fluctuations. The stronger-damped (diffusive)
branch has ω ≃ −iνki kk2 , the weaker-damped one has
ω ≃ −i

i vA
v2A
i vthi
∼ −√
.
∼−
νki
βi λmfpi
βi λmfpi

(167)

This is valid until kk λmfpi ∼ 1, where it is replaced
by the collisionless damping discussed in § 6.2 [see
Eq. (184)].
6.2. Collisionless Regime

In the collisionless regime, kk λmfpi ≫ 1, the collision integral in the right-hand side of the kinetic equation (149) can be
neglected. The v⊥ dependence can then be integrated out of
Eq. (149). Indeed, let us introduce the following two auxiliary
functions:
−1


1
Z
Gn (vk ) = −
+2 1+
τ
βi


 2
Z ∞
1
2π
v⊥
×
g, (168)
dv⊥ v⊥ 2 − 2 1 +
n0i 0
βi
vthi
−1


1
Z
+2 1+
GB (vk ) = −
τ
βi

 2
Z ∞
2π
Z
v
×
g.
(169)
dv⊥ v⊥ 2⊥ +
n0i 0
vthi τ
In terms of these functions,
Z +∞
δne
dvk Gn ,
=
n0e
−∞
Z +∞
δBk
=
dvk GB
B0
−∞

(170)
(171)

and Eq. (149) reduces to the following two coupled onedimensional kinetic equations
−1


dGn
1
Z
∇ Gn = −
+ vk b̂ *∇
+2 1+
vk FM (vk )
dt
τ
βi


 
2 δne 2 δBk
Z
∇
1+
,
(172)
+
×b̂ *∇
τ
βi n0e βi B0
−1


dGB
1
Z
∇ GB =
+ vk b̂ *∇
+2 1+
vk FM (vk )
dt
τ
βi
 




Z
Z δne
Z δBk
∇
×b̂ *∇
1+
, (173)
+ 2+
τ
τ n0e
τ
B0
√
where FM (vk ) = (1/ πvthi ) exp(−v2k /v2thi ) is a one-dimensional
Maxwellian. This system can be diagonalized, so it splits into
two decoupled equations
Z +∞
vk FM (vk )
dG−
∇ G− =
∇
+ vk b̂ *∇
b̂
*∇
dv′k G− (v′k ), (174)
dt
Λ−
−∞
Z +∞
vk FM (vk )
dG+
+
∇
∇G =
b̂ *∇
+ vk b̂ *∇
dv′k G+ (v′k ), (175)
dt
Λ+
−∞

22

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

where
τ 1
Λ± = − + ±
Z βi

s


1+

τ 2 1
+ 2
Z
βi

(176)

and we have introduced a new pair of functions
s
"
#
 τ 2 1 −1
τ 2
τ 1
−
G = Gn +
1+ + +
+ 2
1+
GB , (177)
Z βi
Z βi
Z
βi
s
#
"

 τ 2 1 −1
τ
Z
1
+
1+ + +
G = GB + 1 +
+ 2
1+
Gn .
τ
Z βi
Z
βi
(178)
Equations (174-175) describe two decoupled kinetic cascades.
These cascades are subject to collisionless damping. Indeed, let us lineraize Eqs. (174-175), Fourier transform in
time and space, divide through by −i(ω − kk vk ), and integrate
over vk . This gives the following dispersion relation (the "−"
branch is for G− , the "+" branch for G+ )
ζi Z (ζi ) = Λ± − 1,
(179)
√
where ζi = ω/|kk |vthi = ω/|kk |vA βi and we have used the
plasma dispersion function (Fried & Conte 1961)
Z ∞
2
e−x
1
(180)
dx
Z (ζi ) = √
π −∞ x − ζi

(the integration is along the Landau contour). This function is
not to be confused with the parameter Z [Eq. (36)],
Formally, Eq. (179) has an infinite number of solutions.
When βi ∼ 1, they are all strongly damped with damping rates
Im(ω) ∼ |kk |vthi ∼ |kk |vA , so the damping time is comparable
to the characteristic time scale on which the Alfvén waves
cause these fluctuations to cascade to smaller scales.
It is interesting to consider the high- and low-beta limits.
6.2.1. High-Beta Limit

When βi ≫ 1, we have in Eq. (179)
 τ
Λ− − 1 ≃ −2 1 +
,
G− ≃ Gn ,
(181)
Z
1Z
1
G+ ≃ GB +
Gn .
(182)
Λ+ − 1 ≃ ,
βi
2τ
The "−" branch corresponds to the density fluctuations. The
solution of Eq. (179) has Im(ζi ) ∼ 1, so these fluctuations are
strongly damped:
p
(183)
ω ∼ −i|kk |vA βi .

The damping rate is much greater than the Alfvénic rate kk vA
of the nonlinear cascade. In contrast, for the "+" branch, the
damping
rate is small: it can be obtained by expanding Z(ζi ) =
√
i π + O (ζi ), which gives15
|kk |vthi
|kk |vA
ω = −i √
= −i √
.
πβi
πβi
15

(184)

This is the gyrokinetic limit (kk /k⊥ ≪ 1) of the more general damping
effect known in astrophysics as the Barnes (1966) damping and in plasma
physics as transit-time damping. We remind the reader that our approach was
to carry out the gyrokinetic expansion (in small kk /k⊥ ) first, and then take
the high-beta limit as a subsidiary expansion. A more standard approach in
the linear theory of plasma waves is to take the limit of high βi while treating
kk /k⊥ as an arbitrary quantity. A detailed calculation of the damping rates
done in this way can be found in Foote & Kulsrud (1979).

F IG . 4.- A schematic log-log plot (artist's impression) of the ratio of the
damping rate of magnetic-field-strength fluctuations to the Alfvén frequency
kk vA in the high-beta limit [see Eqs. (165) and (184)].

Since Gn is strongly damped, Eq. (182) implies G+ ≃ GB , i.e.,
the fluctuations that are damped at the rate (184) are predominantly of the magnetic-field strength. The damping
√ rate is a
constant (independent of kk ) small fraction ∼ 1/ βi of the
Alfvénic cascade rate.
In Fig. 4, we give a schematic plot of the damping rate of the
magnetic-field-strength fluctuations (slow waves) connecting
the fluid and kinetic limits for βi ≫ 1.
6.2.2. Low-Beta Limit

When βi ≪ 1, we have
 τ
,
Λ− − 1 ≃ − 1 +
Z
2
Λ+ − 1 ≃ ,
βi

G− ≃ Gn +

τ
GB ,
Z

G+ ≃ GB .

For the "−" branch, we again have Im(ζi ) ∼ 1, so
p
ω ∼ −i|kk |vA βi ,

(185)
(186)

(187)

which now is much smaller than the Alfvénic cascade rate
kk vA . For the "+" branch (predominantly the field-strength
fluctuations), we seek a solution with ζ = −iζ̃i and ζ̃i ≫ 1.
√
Then Eq. (179) becomes ζi Z(ζi ) ≃ 2 π ζ̃i exp(ζ̃i ) = 2/β
p i . Up
to logarithmically small corrections, this gives ζ̃i ≃ | ln βi |,
whence
p
(188)
ω ∼ −i|kk |vA βi | ln βi |.
While this damping rate is slightly greater than that of the "−"
branch, it is still much smaller than the Alfvénic cascade rate.
6.3. Parallel and Perpendicular Cascades

Let us return to the kinetic equation (149) and transform
it to the Lagrangian frame associated with the velocity field
u⊥ = ẑ × ∇ ⊥ Φ of the Alfvén waves: (t, r) → (t, r0 ), where
Z t
dt ′ u⊥ (t ′ , r(t ′ , r0 )).
(189)
r(t, r0 ) = r0 +
0

In this frame, the convective derivative d/dt defined in
Eq. (152) turns into ∂/∂t, while the parallel spatial gradient
∇ can be calculated by employing the Cauchy solution for
b̂ *∇
the perturbed magnetic field δB⊥ = ẑ × ∇ ⊥ Ψ:
b̂(t, r) = ẑ +

δB⊥ (t, r)
∇0 r,
= b̂(0, r0 ) *∇
B0

(190)

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
where r is given by Eq. (189) and ∇0 = ∂/∂r0 . Then

∂
∇ = b̂(0, r0 ) * ∇ 0 r *∇
∇ = b̂(0, r0 ) *∇
∇0 =
b̂ *∇
, (191)
∂s0
where s0 is the arc length along the perturbed magnetic field
taken at t = 0 [if δB⊥ (0, r0 ) = 0, s0 = z0 ]. Thus, in the Lagrangian frame associated with the Alfvénic component of
the turbulence, Eq. (149) is linear. This means that, if the
effect of finite ion gyroradius is neglected, the KRMHD system does not give rise to a cascade of density and magneticfield-strength fluctuations to smaller scales along the moving
(perturbed) field lines, i.e., b̂ * ∇ δne and b̂ * ∇ δBk do not increase. In contrast, there is a perpendicular cascade (cascade
in k⊥ ): the perpendicular wondering of field lines due to the
Alfvénic turbulence causes passive mixing of δne and δBk in
the direction transverse to the magnetic field.16
We emphasize that this lack of nonlinear refinement of the
scale of δne and δBk along the moving field lines is a particular property of the passive component of the turbulence, not
shared by the Alfvén waves. Indeed, unlike Eq. (149), the
RMHD equations (147-148), do not reduce to a linear form
under the Lagrangian transformation (189), so the Alfvén
waves should develop small scales both across and along the
perturbed magnetic field.
Whether the density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations develop small scales along the magnetic field has direct
physical and observational consequences. Damping of these
fluctuations, both in the collisional and collisionless regimes,
discussed in § 6.1 and § 6.2, respectively, depends precisely
on their scale along the perturbed field: indeed, the linear results derived there are exact in the Lagrangian frame (189).
To summarize these results, the damping rate of δne and δBk
at βi ∼ 1 is
2
,
γ ∼ vthi λmfpi kk0

γ ∼ vthi kk0 ,

kk0 λmfpi ≪ 1,

kk0 λmfpi ≫ 1,

(192)

(193)

where kk0 ∼ b̂ * ∇ is the wave number along the perturbed
field (i.e., if there is no parallel cascade, the wave number of
the large-scale stirring).
Whether this damping cuts off the cascades of δne and δBk
depends on the relative magnitudes of the damping rate γ for
a given k⊥ and the characteristic rate at which the Alfvén
waves cause δne and δBk to cascade to higher k⊥ . This rate
is ωA ∼ kkA vA , where kkA is the parallel wave number of the
Alfvén waves that have the same k⊥ . Since the Alfvén waves
do have a parallel cascade, assuming scale-by-scale critical
balance (3) leads to [Eq. (4)]
2/3 −1/3

kkA ∼ k⊥ l0

.

(194)

If, in contrast to the Alfvén waves, δne and δBk have no parallel cascade, kk0 does not grow with k⊥ , so, for large enough
k⊥ , kk0 ≪ kkA and γ ≪ ωA . This means that, despite the damping, the density and field-strength fluctuations should have
perpendicular cascades extending to the ion gyroscale.
The validity of the argument at the beginning of this section that ruled out the parallel cascade of δne and δBk is not
16 See § 2.6 for a quick recapitulation of the standard scaling argument
−5/3
on the passive cascade that leads to a k⊥ in the perpendicular direction.
Note that effectively, there is also a cascade in kk if the latter is measured
along the unperturbed field, i.e., a cascade in kz . This is due to the perpendicular deformation of the perturbed magnetic field by the Alfvén-wave
turbulence: since ∇ ⊥ grows while b̂ * ∇ remains the same, we have from
Eq. (115) ∂/∂z ≃ −(δB⊥ /B0 ) * ∇ ⊥ .

23

quite as obvious as it might appear. Lithwick & Goldreich
(2001) argued that the dissipation of δne and δBk at the ion
gyroscale would cause these fluctuations to become uncorrelated at the same parallel scales as the Alfvénic fluctuations by
which they are mixed, i.e., kk0 ∼ kkA . The damping rate then
becomes comparable to the cascade rate, cutting off the cascades of density and field-strength fluctuations at kk λmfpi ∼ 1.
The corresponding perpendicular cutoff wave number is [see
Eq. (194)]
1/2 −3/2

k⊥ ∼ l0 λmfpi .

(195)

Asymptotically speaking, in a weakly collisional plasma,
this cutoff is far above the ion gyroscale, k⊥ ρi ≪ 1. However, the relatively small value of λmfpi in the warm ISM
(which was the main focus of Lithwick & Goldreich 2001)
meant that the numerical value of the perpendicular cutoff
scale given by Eq. (195) was, in fact, quite close both to
the ion gyroscale (see Table 1) and to the observational estimates for the inner scale of the electron-density fluctuations
in the ISM (Spangler & Gwinn 1990; Armstrong et al. 1995).
Thus, it was not possible to tell whether Eq. (195), rather than
k⊥ ∼ ρ−1
i , represented the correct prediction.
The situation is rather different in the nearly collisionless
case of the solar wind, where the cutoff given by Eq. (195)
would mean that very little density or field-strength fluctuations should be detected above the ion gyroscale. Observations do not support such a conclusion: the density fluctuations appear to follow a k−5/3 law at all scales larger than a few
times ρi (Celnikier et al. 1983, 1987; Coles & Harmon 1989;
Marsch & Tu 1990; Coles et al. 1991), consistently with the
expected behavior of an undamped passive scalar field (see
§ 2.6). It is interesting, in view of the above discussion,
that in near-the-Sun measurements, these fluctuations are reported to have the form of highly anisotropic density filaments aligned with the magnetic field (Armstrong et al. 1990;
Grall et al. 1997; Woo & Habbal 1997). An extended range
of k−5/3 scaling above the ion gyroscale is also observed for
the fluctuations of the magnetic-field strength (Marsch & Tu
1990; Bershadskii & Sreenivasan 2004; Hnat et al. 2005).
These observational facts suggest that the cutoff formula
(195) does not apply. This does not, however, conclusively
vitiate the Lithwick & Goldreich (2001) Theory. Heuristically, their argument is plausible, although it is, perhaps,
useful to note that in order for the effect of the perpendicular dissipation terms, not present in the KRMHD equations
(149-151), to be felt, the density and field-strength fluctuations should reach the ion gyroscale in the first place. Quantitatively, the failure of the density fluctuations in the solar wind to be damped could still be consistent with the
Lithwick & Goldreich (2001) theory because of the relative
weakness of the collisionless damping, especially at low beta
(§ 6.2.2)-the explanation they themselves favor. The way to
check observationally whether this explanation suffices would
be to make a comparative study of the density and fieldstrength fluctuations for solar-wind data with different values
of βi . If the strength of the damping is the decisive factor,
one should always see cascades of both δne and δBk at low
βi , no cascades at βi ∼ 1, and a cascade of δBk but not δne at
high βi (in this limit, the damping of the density fluctuations
is strong, of field-strength weak; see § 6.2.1). If, on the other
hand, the parallel cascade of the compressive fluctuations is
intrinsically inefficient, very little βi dependence is expected
and a perpendicular cascade should be seen in all cases.

24

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

Obviously, an even more direct observational (or numerical) test would be the detection or non-detection of nearperfect alignment of the density and field-strength structures
with the moving field lines (not with the mean magnetic
field-see footnote 16), but it is not clear how to measure this
reliably.
7. TURBULENCE IN THE DISSIPATION RANGE: ELECTRON RMHD
AND THE ENTROPY CASCADE

The validity of the theory discussed in § 5 and § 6 breaks
down when k⊥ ρi ∼ 1. As the ion gyroscale is approached,
the Alfvén waves are no longer decoupled from the rest of
the plasma dynamics. All modes now contain perturbations
of the density and magnetic-field strength and can, therefore, be damped. Because of the low-frequency nature of the
Alfvén-wave cascade, ω ≪ Ωi even at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 [Eq. (46)],
so ion cyclotron damping is not important, while the Landau
damping is. The linear theory of this collisionless damping
in the gyrokinetic approximation is worked out in detail in
Howes et al. (2006).
The nonlinear theory of what happens at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 is very
poorly understood. It is, however, possible to make progress
by examining what kind of fluctuations emerge on "the other
side" of the transition, at k⊥ ρi ≫ 1. It turns out that another
turbulent cascade-this time of kinetic Alfvén waves (KAW,
sometimes called whistlers in astrophysical literature)-is
possible in this so-called "dissipation range." It can transfer
the turbulent energy down to the electron gyroscale, where
it is dissipated (probably by the electron Landau damping;
see Howes et al. 2006). Some observational evidence of such
a cascade is, indeed, available in the solar wind (Bale et al.
2005; Grison et al. 2005, see further discussion in § 8.1.5).
Below, we derive the equations that describe KAW-like fluctuations in the scale range k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, k⊥ ρe ≪ 1 and discuss
this cascade.
Because of the presence of the collisionless damping at
the ion gyroscale, only a certain fraction of the turbulent
power arriving there from the inertial range is converted into
the KAW cascade, while the rest is damped. The damping
leads to the heating of the ions, an aspect of the k⊥ ρi ∼ 1
physics that is of considerable astrophysical interest: e.g., the
efficiency of ion heating has been studied in the context of
advection-dominated accretion flows (Quataert & Gruzinov
1999, see discussion in § 8.3) and of the solar corona (e.g.,
Cranmer & van Ballegooijen 2003). The process of depositing the collisionlessly damped fluctuation energy into the ion
heat is not trivial because, as we explained in § 3.5, collisions
do need to play a role in order for heating to occur. That is
brought about by the development of a purely kinetic entropy
cascade in phase space, discussed in § 7.4 and § 7.5.
A short summary of this section is given in § 7.8.
7.1. Equations of Electron Reduced MHD

The derivation is straightforward: when ai ∼ k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, all
Bessel functions in Eqs. (110-111) are small, so the integrals
of the ion distribution function vanish and Eqs. (110-111) become
Zeφ
2 Φ
δne
=−
= −√
,
(196)
n0e
T0i
βi ρ i v A




δBk βi
Z Zeφ p
Φ
Z
1+
=
= βi 1 +
, (197)
B0
2
τ
T0i
τ ρi v A
uke =

c
ρi ∇2 Ψ
∇2⊥ Ak = − √ ⊥ ,
4πen0e
βi

uki = 0, (198)

where we used the definitions (127) of the stream and flux
functions Φ and Ψ. These equations are a reflection of the
fact that, for k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, the ion response is effectively purely
Boltzmann, with the gyrokinetic part hi contributing nothing
to the fields or flows [see Eq. (47) with hi omitted; hi does play
an important role, however, as explained in §§ 7.3-7.5 below].
Substituting Eqs. (196-198) into Eqs. (108-109), we obtain
the following closed system of equations

∂Ψ
∇Φ,
(199)
= vA 1 + Z/τ b̂ *∇
∂t

vA
∂Φ
 b̂ *∇
∇ ρ2i ∇2⊥ Ψ .
(200)
=−
∂t
2 + βi 1 + Z/τ

Note that, in view of Eq. (197), Eqs. (199) and (200) are
evolution equations for the perpendicular and parallel components of the perturbed magnetic field, respectively.
We shall refer to Eqs. (199-200) as Electron Reduced MHD
(ERMHD). They are related to the Electron, or Hall, Magnetohydrodynamics (EMHD)-a fluid-like approximation that
evolves the magnetic field only and arises if one assumes that
the magnetic field is frozen into the electron flow velocity ue ,
while the ions are immobile, ui = 0 (Kingsep et al. 1990):


∂B
c
∇ × B) × B .
∇ × (∇
(201)
=−
∂t
4πen0e
It is not hard to show that if the gyrokinetic ordering (§ 3.1) is
applied to Eq. (201), we have
δBk
δB 1
= ẑ × ∇ ⊥ Ψ + ẑ
,
(202)
B 0 vA
B0
where the second term can be written in terms of Φ according
to Eq. (197) and the equations for Ψ and Φ then coincide with
the βi ≪ 1 limit of Eqs. (199) and (200). When βi is arbitrary, ui = 0 does not quite follow from assuming k⊥ ρi ≫ 1,
because density fluctuations are important [Eq. (196)] and,
consequently, the divergence of the ion velocity field ∇ * ui
gives rise to a nonnegligible contribution in Eq. (200) (see
Appendix C.2 for details).
7.2. Kinetic-Alfvén-Wave Cascade

The linear fluctuation modes supported by ERMHD are kinetic Alfvén waves with frequencies
s
1 + Z/τ
 k ⊥ ρi k k v A .
(203)
ω=±
2 + βi 1 + Z/τ

The corresponding eigenfunctions are
q
 Φk

1 + Z/τ 2 + βi 1 + Z/τ
∓ k⊥ Ψ k .
Θ±
=
k
ρi

(204)

As in the case of Alfvén waves, there are two counterpropagating modes, but it is no longer true that copropagating waves do not interact, nor do individual finite-amplitude
KAW-like fluctuations constitute exact solutions of the nonlinear problem (cf. § 2.4). Since we have derived Eqs. (199200) from gyrokinetics, the anisotropy of the fluctuations is
hard-wired. However, it is not guaranteed that the actual physical cascade below the ion gyroscale is indeed anisotropic (although analysis of solar-wind measurements does seem to indicate that it is; see Leamon et al. 1998).
There is no definitive a priori argument that the EMHD turbulence should be analogous to the Alfvénic one, i.e., that
it should consist of KAW-like fluctuations with kk ≪ k⊥

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
and that the interactions between them should be strong. In
fact, the EMHD turbulence was thought to be weak by several authors, who predicted a k−2 spectrum of magnetic energy assuming isotropy (Goldreich & Reisenegger 1992) or
−5/2
k⊥ for the anisotropic case (Galtier & Bhattacharjee 2003;
Galtier 2006; see also Voitenko 1998). However, numerical simulations based on Eq. (201) (Biskamp et al. 1996,
1999; Ng et al. 2003; Cho & Lazarian 2004)) have revealed
−7/3
that the spectrum of magnetic fluctuations scales as k⊥ ,
the outcome consistent with assuming that the turbulence is
anisotropic (Quataert & Gruzinov 1999) and critically balanced (Cho & Lazarian 2004), i.e., that the propagation time
and nonlinear interaction time are comparable at every scale.
Let us review the argument that leads to this scaling.
First assume that the fluctuations are KAW-like and that Θ+
and Θ− [Eq. (204)] have similar scaling. This implies
Ψλ ∼

p
λ
1 + βi Φ λ
ρi

(205)

(for the purposes of scaling arguments and order-ofmagnitude estimates, we set Z/τ = 1, but keep the βi dependence so low- and high-beta limits could be recovered if necessary).
Assuming scale-space locality of interactions implies, analogously to Eq. (1),
(Ψλ /λ)2
(1 + βi)(Φλ /ρi )2
∼
∼ εKAW = const,
τKAWλ
τKAWλ

(206)

where τKAWλ is the cascade time and εKAW is the KAW energy
flux proportional to the fraction of the total flux ε (or the total
turbulent power Pext ; see § 3.4) that was converted into the
KAW cascade at the ion gyroscale.
Using Eqs. (199-200) and Eq. (205), it is not hard to see
that the characteristic nonlinear decorrelation time is λ2 /Φλ .
If the turbulence is strong, then this time is comparable to
the inverse KAW frequency [Eq. (203)] scale by scale and we
may assume the cascade time is comparable to either:
τKAWλ ∼

λ2
1 ρi v A
∼√
.
Φλ
1 + βi λ lkλ

(207)

In other words, this says that ∂/∂z ∼ (δB⊥ /B0 ) * ∇ ⊥ and so
δB⊥λ /B0 ∼ λ/lkλ (note that the last relation confirms that our
scaling arguments do not violate the gyrokinetic ordering; see
§ 2.1 and § 3.1). Equation (207) is the critical balance assumption for KAW. As in the case of the Alfvén waves (§ 1.1), we
might argue physically that the critical balance is set up because the parallel correlation length lkλ of the KAW turbulence is such that a wave can propagate the distance lkλ in one
nonlinear decorrelation time corresponding to the perpendicular correlation length λ.
Combining Eqs. (206) and (207), we get the desired scaling
relations for the KAW turbulence:
1/3
ε
vA
KAW
−1/3 2/3 2/3
ρi λ ,
(208)
l
Φλ ∼
ε
(1 + βi )1/3 0
1/3 1/3 1/3 1/3

l0 ρi λ
ε
,
(209)
lkλ ∼
εKAW
(1 + βi)1/6
where l0 = v3A /ε, as before. The first of these scaling relations
−7/3
is equivalent to a k⊥ spectrum of magnetic energy, the second quantifies the anisotropy (which is stronger than for the

25

GS turbulence). Both scalings were confirmed in the numerical simulations of Cho & Lazarian (2004)-it is their detection of the scaling (209) that makes a particularly strong case
that KAW turbulence is not weak and that the critical balance
hypothesis applies.
For KAW-like fluctuations, the density [Eq. (196)] and
magnetic field [Eqs. (197) and (204)] have the same spec−7/3
trum as the scalar potential, i.e., k⊥ , while the electric field
−1/3
E ∼ k⊥ φ has a k⊥ spectrum. The solar-wind fluctuation
spectra below the ion gyroscale reported by Bale et al. (2005)
are consistent with KAW turbulence: the k−7/3 scaling for the
magnetic fluctuations and k−1/3 for the electric ones. However, not all solar-wind observations are quite as straightforwardly supportive of the notion of the KAW cascade and
much steeper magnetic-fluctuation spectra have also been reported (e.g., Leamon et al. 1998; Smith et al. 2006). Possible
reasons for this will emerge in § 7.5.
7.3. Generalized Energy: KAW and Entropy Cascades

The generalized energy (§ 3.4) in the limit k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 is calculated by substituting Eqs. (196) and (197) into Eq. (101):
Z
Z
T0i hh2i ir δB2⊥
+
W = d3r
d3v
2F0i
8π



 
2 )
n0i T0i
Z
βi
Z
Zeφ
+
1+
1+
1+
2
τ
2
τ
T0i
=Wh + WKAW .

(210)

Here the first term, Wh , is the total variance of hi , which is
proportional to minus the entropy of the ion gyrocenter distrbution (see § 3.5) and whose cascade to collisional scales will
be discussed in § 7.4 and § 7.5. The remaining two terms are
the independently cascaded KAW energy:

Z
mi n0i
∇Ψ|2
|∇
WKAW = d 3 r
2



 2 
Z
βi
Z
Φ
+ 1+
1+
1+
τ
2
τ
ρ2i
Z

mi n0i
(211)
= d3r
|Θ+ |2 + |Θ−|2 .
2
While we can write WKAW as the sum of the energies of the
"+" and "−" linear KAW eigenmodes [Eq. (204)], the two do
not cascade independently and can exchange energy.
Comparing the way the generalized energy is split above
and below the ion gyroscale (see § 5.6 for the k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 limit),
we might interpret what happens at the k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 transition as
a redistrbution of the power that arrived from large scales between a cascade of KAW and a cascade of the (minus) gyrocenter entropy in the phase space. The latter cascade is the
way in which the energy diverted from the electromagnetic
fluctuations by the collisionless damping (wave-particle interaction) can be transferred to the collisional scales and deposited into heat. The concept of entropy cascade as the key
agent in the heating of the plasma was introduced in § 3.5,
where we promised a more detailed discussion later on. We
now proceed to this discussion.
7.4. Kinetic Ion-Entropy Cascade in the Presence of KAW

Turbulence
The ion-gyrocenter distribution function hi satisfies the ion
gyrokinetic equation (113), where ion-electron collisions are

26

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

neglected under the mass-ratio expansion. At k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, the
dominant contribution to hχiRi comes from the the electromagnetic fluctuations associated with KAW turbulence. Since
the KAW cascade is decoupled from the entropy cascade, hi
is a passive tracer of the ring-averaged KAW turbulence in
phase space. Expanding the Bessel functions in the expression for hχiRi ,k [ai ≫ 1 in Eq. (62) with s = i] and making
use of Eqs. (197-198) and of the KAW scaling Ψ ∼ Φ/k⊥ ρi
[Eq. (204)], it is not hard to show that
Ze
2 J0 (ai )Φk
Ze
hχiRi ,k ≃
hφiRi ,k = √
,
T0i
T0i
βi ρ i v A

(212)

where
J0 (ai ) ≃

r


π
2
,
cos ai −
πai
4

a i = k ⊥ ρi

v⊥
,
vthi

(213)

so hi satisfies [Eq. (113)]

∂hΦiRi
2
∂hi
∂hi
+ vk
+ {hΦiRi , hi } = √
F0i + hCii [hi ]iRi
∂t
∂z
βi ρi vA ∂t
(214)
with the conservation law [Eq. (63), s = i]
Z
Z
1 dWh
d
h2
≡
d 3 v d 3 Ri i
T0i dt
dt
2F0i
Z
Z
2
∂hΦiRi
=√
d 3 v d 3 Ri
hi
∂t
βi ρ i v A
Z
Z
hi hCii [hi ]iRi
.
(215)
+ d 3 v d 3 Ri
F0i
7.4.1. Small Scales in Phase Space

The wave-particle interaction term (the first term on the
right hand sides of these two equations) will shortly be seen
to be subdominant at k⊥ ρi ≫ 1. It represents the source of
the invariant Wh due to the collisionless damping at the ion
gyroscale of some fraction of the energy arriving from the inertial range. In a stationary turbulent state, we should have
dWh /dt = 0 and this source should be balanced on average by
the (negative definite) collisional dissipation term [ = heating;
see Eq. (69)]. This balance can only be achieved if hi develops
small scales in the velocity space and carries the generalized
energy, or, in this case, entropy, to scales in the phase space at
which collisions are important. A quick way to see this is by
recalling that the collision operator has two velocity derivatives and can only balance the terms on the left-hand side of
Eq. (214) if
 2
 1/2
δv
∂
νii
2
, (216)
∼ω ⇒
∼
νii vthi
∂v
vthi
ω
where ω is the characteristic frequency of the fluctuations
of hi . If νii ≪ ω, δv/vthi ≪ 1. This is certainly true for
k⊥ ρi ∼ 1: taking ω ∼ kk vA and using kk λmfpi ≫ 1 (which
is the appropriate limit at and below the ion gyroscale for
most of √
the plasmas of interest; cf. footnote 14), we have
νii /ω ∼ βi /kk λmfpi ≪ 1.
The condition (216) means that the collision rate can be arbitrarily small-this will always be compensated by the sufficiently fine velocity-space structure of the distribution function to produce a finite amount of entropy production (heating) independent of νii in the limit νii → +0. The situation bears some resemblance to the emergence of small spatial scales in neutral-fluid turbulence with arbitrarily small

but nonzero viscosity (Kolmogorov 1941). The analogy is
not perfect, however, because the ion gyrokinetic equation
(214) does not contain a nonlinear interaction term that would
explicitly cause a cascade in the velocity space. Instead,
the (ring-averaged) KAW turbulence mixes hi in the gyrocenter space via the nonlinear term in Eq. (214), so hi will
have small-scale structure in Ri on characteristic scales much
smaller than ρi . Let us assume that the dominant nonlinear effect is a local interaction of the small-scale fluctuations of hi with the similarly small-scale component of hΦiRi .
Since ring averaging is involved and k⊥ ρi is large, the values of hΦiRi corresponding to two velocities v and v′ will
come from spatially decorrelated electromagnetic fluctuations
if k⊥ v⊥ /Ωi and k⊥ v′⊥ /Ωi [the argument of the Bessel function
in Eq. (212)] differ by order unity, i.e., for
1
δv⊥ |v⊥ − v′⊥ |
=
∼
.
(217)
vthi
vthi
k ⊥ ρi
This relation gives a correspondence between the decorrelation scales of hi in the position and velocity space. Combining
Eqs. (217) and (216), we see that there is a collisional cutoff
scale determined by k⊥ ρi ∼ (ω/νii )1/2 ≫ 1.17 The cutoff scale
is much smaller than the ion gyroscale. In the range between
these scales, collisional dissipation is small. The ion entropy
fluctuations are transferred across this scale range by means
of a cascade, for a which we now construct a scaling theory.
7.4.2. Scalings and the Phase-Space Cutoff

Since entropy is a conserved quantity, we will follow the
well trodden Kolmogorov path, assume locality of interactions in scale space and constant entropy flux, and conclude,
analogously to Eq. (1),
v8thi h2iλ
∼ εh = const,
(218)
n20i
where εh is the entropy flux proportional to the fraction of the
total turbulent power ε (or Pext ; see § 3.4) that was diverted
into the entropy cascade at the ion gyroscale, and is the cascade time that we now need to find.
By the critical-balance assumption, the decorrelation time
of the electromagnetic fluctuations in KAW turbulence is
comparable at each scale to the KAW period at that scale and
to the nonlinear interaction time (Eq. (207)):
1/3

1/3 −2/3
l ρ λ4/3
λ2
ε
∼
. (219)
τKAWλ ∼
(1 + βi )1/3 0 i
Φλ
εKAW
vA
The characteristic time associated with the nonlinear term in
Eq. (214) is longer than τKAWλ by a factor of (ρi /λ)1/2 due
to the ring averaging, which reduces the strength of the nonlinear interaction. This weakness of the nonlinearity makes it
possible to develop a systematic analytical theory of the entropy cascade (Schekochihin et al. 2007b). It is also possible
to estimate the cascade time via a more qualitative argument
analogous to that first devised by Kraichnan (1965) for the
weak turbulence of Alfvén waves: during each KAW correaltion time τKAWλ , the nonlinearity changes the amplitude of hi
by only a small amount:
∆hiλ ∼ (λ/ρi )1/2 hiλ ≪ hiλ ;

(220)

17 Another source of small-scale spatial smoothing comes from the per2 ρ2 h that arise in
pendicular gyrocenter-diffusion terms ∼ −νii (v/vthi )2 k⊥
i ik
the ring-averaged collision operators, e.g., the second term in the model operator (B12). These terms again enforce a cutoff wave number such that
k⊥ ρi ∼ (ω/νii )1/2 ≫ 1.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
these changes accumulate with time as a random walk,
so after time t, the cumulative change in amplitude is
∆hiλ (t/τKAWλ )1/2 ; finally, the cascade time t = is the time
after which the cumulative change in amplitude is comparable to the amplitude itself, which gives, using Eq. (219),
1/3

1/3 1/3
l ρ λ1/3
ε
ρi
. (221)
(1 + βi)1/3 0 i
∼ τKAWλ ∼
λ
εKAW
vA
Substituting this into Eq. (218), we get
 1/2 
1/6
n0i εh
ε
(1 + βi)1/6 −1/3 1/6 1/6
√
hiλ ∼ 3
l0 ρi λ ,
εKAW
vthi ε
βi
(222)
−4/3
which corresponds to a k⊥ spectrum of entropy.
To work out the cutoff scales both in the gyrocenter and
velocity space, we use Eqs. (216) and (217): in Eq. (216),
ω ∼ 1/, where is the characteristic decorrelation time of hi
given by Eq. (221); using Eq. (217), we find the cutoffs:
δv⊥
1
∼
∼ (νii τhρi )3/5 ,
vthi
k ⊥ ρi

(223)

where τhρi is the cascade time (221) taken at λ = ρi .
In the argument presented above, we assumed that the scaling of hi was determined by the nonlinear mixing of hi by
the ring-averaged KAW fluctuations rather than by the waveparticle-interaction term on the right-hand side of Eq. (214).
We can now confirm the validity of this assumption. The
change in amplitude of hi in one KAW correlation time τKAWλ
due to the wave-particle-interaction term is
 1/2
Φ
n0i λ
√ λ
∆hiλ ∼ 3
vthi ρi
βi ρ i v A
n0i  εKAW 1/3
1
−1/3 −5/6 7/6
√
∼ 3
l
ρi λ , (224)
ε
vthi
βi (1 + βi)1/3 0
where we have used Eq. (208). Comparing this with Eq. (220)
and using Eq. (222), we see that ∆hiλ in Eq. (224) is a factor
of (λ/ρi )1/2 smaller than ∆hiλ due to the nonlinear mixing.
7.4.3. Parallel Phase Mixing

Another assumption, which was made implicitly, was that
the parallel phase mixing due to the second term on the lefthand side of Eq. (214) could be ignored. This requires justification, especially because it is with this "ballistic" term
that one traditionally associates the emergence of small-scale
structure in the velocity space (e.g., Krommes 1999). The effect of the parallel phase mixing is to produce small scales in
velocity space δvk ∼ 1/kkt. Let us assume that the KAW turbulence imparts its parallel decorrelation scale to hi and use
−1
the scaling relation (209) to estimate kk ∼ lkλ
. Then, after one
cascade time [Eq. (221)], hi is decorrelated on the parallel velocity scales
lkλ
δvk
1
∼ 1.
∼
∼√
vthi
vthi
βi (1 + βi)

(225)

We conclude that the nonlinear perpendicular phase mixing
[Eq. (223)] is more efficient than the linear parallel one. Note
that up to a βi -dependent factor Eq. (225) is equivalent to a
critical-balance-like assumption for hi in the sense that the
propagation time is comparable to the cascade time, or kk vk ∼
−1
[see Eq. (214)].

27

7.5. Kinetic Ion-Entropy Cascade in the Absence of KAW

Turbulence
It is not currenty known how one might determine analytically what fraction of the turbulent power arriving from the
inertial range to the ion gyroscale is channelled into the KAW
cascade and what fraction is dissipated via the kinetic ionentropy cascade introduced in § 7.4 (perhaps it can only be
determined by direct numerical simulations). It is certainly
a fact that in many solar-wind measurements, the relatively
shallow magnetic-energy spectra associated with the KAW
cascade (§ 7.2) fail to appear and much steeper spectra are
detected (close to k−4 ; see Leamon et al. 1998; Smith et al.
2006). In view of this evidence, it is interesting to ask what
would be the nature of electromagnetic fluctuations below the
ion gyroscale if the KAW cascade failed to be launched, i.e.,
if all (or most) of the turbulent power were directed into the
entropy cascade (i.e., if W ≃ Wh in § 7.3).
7.5.1. Equations

It is again possible to derive a closed set of equations for all
fluctuating quantities.
Let us assume (and verify a posteriori; § 7.5.4) that the
characteristic frequency of such fluctuations is much lower
than the KAW frequency [Eq. (203)] so that the first term in
Eq. (108) is small and the equation reduces to the balance of
the other two terms. This gives
δne eφ
=
,
n0e T0e

(226)

meaning that the electrons are purely Boltzmann [he = 0 to
lowest order; see Eq. (93)]. Then, from Eq. (110),
Z
 τ −1 X
2 Φ
Zeφ
ik*r 1
e .
≡√
= 1+
d 3 v J0 (ai )hik
T0i
Z
n
βi ρ i v A
0i
k
(227)
Using Eq. (227), we find from Eq. (111) that the fieldstrength fluctuations are
Z
δBk
βi X ik*r 1
2v2 J1 (ai )
e
=−
hik ,
(228)
d 3 v 2⊥
B0
2 k
n0i
vthi ai
which is smaller than Zeφ/T0i by a factor of βi /k⊥ ρi .
Therefore, we can neglect δBk /B0 compared to δne /n0e in
Eq. (109). Using Eq. (226), we get what is physically the
electron continuity equation:


∂ eφ
c
∇
+ b̂ *∇
∇ 2⊥ Ak + uki = 0,
(229)
∂t T0e
4πen0e
Z
X
1
eik*r
uki =
d 3 v vk J0 (ai )hik .
(230)
n
0i
k

Note that in terms of the stream and flux functions, Eq. (229)
takes the form
∂uki
∂ 2 2
2τ 1 ∂Φ p
ρi ∇ ⊥ Ψ =
+ βi ρ i
,
(231)
∂z
Z vA ∂t
∂z

where we have approximated b̂ * ∇ ≃ ∂/∂z, which will, indeed, be shown to be correct in § 7.5.4.
Together with ion gyrokinetic equation, which determines
hi , Eqs. (226-229) form a closed set. They describe lowfrequency fluctuations of the density and electromagnetic
field due solely to the presence of fluctuations of hi below
the ion gyroscale.

28

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

It follows from Eq. (228) that δBk /B0 contributes subdominantly to hχiRi [Eq. (62) with s = i and ai ≫ 1]. It will be
verified a posteriori (§ 7.5.4) that the same is true for Ak .
Therefore, Eqs. (212) and (214) continue to hold true, as in
the case with KAW. This means that Eqs. (214) and (227)
form a closed subset. Thus the kinetic ion-entropy cascade is
self-regulating in the sense that hi is no longer passive (as it
was in the presence of KAW turbulence; § 7.4) but is mixed
by the ring-averaged "electrostatic" fluctuations of the scalar
potential, which themselves are produced by hi according to
Eq. (227).
The magnetic fluctuations are passive and determined by
the electrostatic and entropy fluctuations via Eqs. (228)
and (229).
7.5.2. Scalings for the Electrostatic Fluctuations

From Eq. (227), we can establish a correspondence between
Φλ and hiλ (the electrostatic fluctuations and the fluctuations
of the ion-gyrocenter distribution function):

1/2
 1/2
p
hiλ v3thi δv⊥
v4
λ
∼ thi hiλ λ,
Φ λ ∼ ρ i v A βi
ρi
n0i
vthi
n0i
(232)
where the factor of (λ/ρi )1/2 comes from the Bessel function
[Eq. (213)] and the factor of (δv⊥ /vthi )1/2 results from the
v⊥ integration of the oscillatory factor in the Bessel function
times hi , which decorrelates on small scales in the velocity
space and, therefore, its integral accumulates in a randomwalk-like fashion. The velocity-space scales are related to the
spatial scales via Eq. (217), which was arrived at by an argument not specific to KAW-like fluctuations and, therefore,
continues to hold.
Using Eq. (232), we find that the wave-particle interaction
term in the right-hand side of Eq. (214) is subdominant: comparing it with ∂hi /∂t shows that it is smaller by a factor of
(λ/ρi )3/2 ≪ 1. Therefore, it is the nonlinear term in Eq. (214)
that controls the scalings of hiλ and Φλ .
We now assume again the scale-space locality and constancy of the entropy flux, so Eq. (218) holds. The cascade
(decorrelation) time is equal to the characteristic time associated with the nonlinear term in Eq. (214): ∼ (ρi /λ)1/2 λ2 /Φλ .
Substituting this into Eq. (218) and using Eq. (232), we arrive
at the desired scaling relations for the entropy cascade:
n0i  εh 1/3 1 −1/3 1/6 1/6
√ l0 ρi λ ,
(233)
hiλ ∼ 3
vthi ε
βi
 ε 1/3
h
−1/3 1/6
vA l0 ρi λ7/6 ,
(234)
Φλ ∼
ε
 1/3 1/3 1/3 1/3
l0 ρi λ
ε
.
(235)
∼
εh
vA
Note that since the existence of this cascade depends on it not
being overwhelmed by the KAW fluctuations, we should have
εKAW ≪ ε and εh = ε − εKAW ≈ ε.
The scaling for the ion-gyrocenter distribution function,
−4/3
Eq. (233), implies a k⊥ spectrum-the same as for the KAW
turbulence [Eq. (222)]. The scaling for the the cascade time,
Eq. (235), is also similar to that for the KAW turbulence
[Eq. (221)]. Therefore the velocity- and gyrocenter-space cutoffs are still given by Eq. (223), where τhρi is now given by
Eq. (235) taken at λ = ρi .
A new feature is the scaling of the scalar potential, given by
−10/3
Eq. (234), which corresponds to a k⊥ spectrum (unlike the

KAW spectrum, § 7.2). This is a measurable prediction for the
electrostatic fluctuations: the implied electric-field spectrum
−4/3
is k⊥ . From Eq. (226), we also conclude that the density
fluctuations should have the same spectrum as the scalar po−10/3
tential, k⊥ -another measurable prediction.
7.5.3. Parallel Cascade and Parallel Phase Mixing

We have again ignored the "ballistic" term (the second on
the left-hand side) in Eq. (214). We will estimate the efficiency of the parallel spatial cascade of the ion entropy and of
the associated parallel phase mixing by making a conjecture
analogous to the critical balance: assuming that any two perpendicular planes only remain correlated provided particles
can stream between them in one nonlinear decorrelation time
(cf. § 1.1 and § 7.4.3), we conclude that the parallel particlestreaming frequency kk vk should be comparable at each scale
to the inverse nonlinear time −1 , so
kk vthi ∼ 1.

(236)

As we explained in § 7.4.3, the parallel scales in the velocity
space generated via the ballistic term are related to the parallel
wave numbers by δvk ∼ 1/kkt. From Eq. (236), we find that
after one cascade time , the typical parallel velocity scale is
δvk /vthi ∼ 1, so the parallel phase mixing is again much less
efficient than the perpendicular one.
7.5.4. Scalings for the Magnetic Fluctuations

The scaling law for the fluctuations of the magnetic-field
strength follows immediately from Eqs. (228) and (234):
p −1/3 −11/6 13/6
δBkλ p λ Φλ
∼ βi
∼ βi l0 ρi
λ ,
B0
ρi ρi v A

(237)

−16/3

whence the spectrum of these fluctuations is k⊥ .
The scaling of Ak (the perpendicular magnetic fluctuations)
depends on the relation between kk and k⊥ . Indeed, the ratio
between the first and the third terms on the left-hand side of
Eq. (229) [or, equivalently, between the first and second terms
−1
on the right-hand side of Eq. (231)] is ∼ kk vthi . For a critically balanced cascade, this makes the two terms comparable
[Eq. (236)]. Using the first term to work out the scaling for the
perpendicular magnetic fluctuations, we get, using Eq. (234),
p −1/3 −11/6 13/6
1 Ψ λ p λ Φλ
δB⊥λ
λ ,
∼
∼ βi
∼ βi l0 ρi
B0
λ vA
ρi ρi v A
(238)
which is the same scaling as for δBk /B0 [Eq. (237)].
Using Eq. (238) together with Eqs. (234) and (235), it is
now straightforward to confirm the three assumptions made
in § 7.5.1 that we promised to verify a posteriori:
∇φ, so Eq. (226) holds (the
1. In Eq. (108), ∂Ak /∂t ≪ cb̂*∇
electrons remain Boltzmann). This means that no KAW
can be excited by the cascade.
2. δB⊥ /B0 ≪ kk /k⊥ , so b̂ * ∇ ≃ ∂/∂z in Eq. (229). This
means that field lines are not significantly perturbed.
3. In the expression for hχiRi [Eq. (62)], vk Ak /c ≪ φ, so
Eq. (214) holds. This means that the electrostatic fluctuations dominate the cascade.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
7.5.5. Cascades Superposed?

The spectra of magnetic fluctuations obtained in § 7.5.4 are
very steep-steeper, in fact, than those normally observed in
the dissipation range of the solar wind. One might speculate
that the observed spectra may be due to a superposition of
the two cascades realizable below the ion gyroscale: a highfrequency cascade of KAW (§ 7.2) and a low-frequency cascade of electrostatic fluctuations due to the ion entropy fluctuations (§ 7.5). Such a superposition could happen if the power
going into the KAW cascade is relatively small, εKAW ≪ ε.
One then expects an electrostatic cascade to be set up just
below the ion gyroscale with the KAW cascade superceding
it deeper into the dissipation range. Comparing Eqs. (208)
and (234), we can estimate the position of the spectral break:
2/3
.
(239)
k⊥ ρi ∼ ε/εKAW

Since ρi /ρe ∼ (τ mi /me )1/2 /Z is not a very large number,
the dissipation range is not very wide. It then conceivable
that the observed spectra are not true power laws but simply
nonasymptotic superpositions of the electrostatic and KAW
spectra with the observed range of "effective" spectral exponents due to varying values of the spectral break (239) between the two cascades.18
The value of εKAW /ε specific to any particular set of parameters (βi , τ , etc.) is set by what happens at k⊥ ρi ∼ 1-clearly a
crucial place for determining the properties of the turbulence
in the dissipation range, just as it is for solving the problem
of ion heating mentioned at the beginning of § 7 (see § 8.1.5,
§ 8.3 for further discussion).
7.6. Below the Electron Gyroscale: The Last Cascade
Finally, let us consider what happens when k⊥ ρe ≫ 1. At
these scales, we have to return to the full gyrokinetic system of equations. The quasineutrality [Eq. (54)], parallel
[Eq. (55)] and perpendicular [Eq. (59)] Ampère's law become
−1 X

Z
Z
eφ
ik*r 1
= − 1+
e
d 3 v J0 (ae )hek , (240)
T0e
τ
n0e
k
Z
X
c
1
2
∇⊥ Ak =
eik*r
d 3 v vk J0 (ae )hek , (241)
4πen0e
n0e
k
Z
X
δBk
1
βi Z
2v2 J1 (ae )
eik*r
=−
hek , (242)
d 3 v 2⊥
B0
2 τ
n0e
vthe ae
k

where we have discarded the velocity integrals of hi both because the gyroaveraging makes them subdominant in powers
of (me /mi )1/2 and because the fluctuations of hi are damped by
collisions [assuming the collisional cutoff given by Eq. (223)
lies above the electron gyroscale]. To Eqs. (240-242), we
must append the gyrokinetic equation for he [Eq. (50) with
s = e], thus closing the system.
The type of turbulence described by these equations is very
similar to that discussed in § 7.5. It is easy to show from
Eqs. (240-242) that
δBk
δB⊥
βi eφ
∼
∼
.
(243)
B0
B0
k⊥ ρe T0e
Hence the magnetic fluctuations are subdominant in the expression for hχiRe [Eq. (62) with s = e and ae ≫ 1], so

18 Several alternative theories that aim to explain the dissipation-range
spectra exist (e.g., Voitenko 1998; Stawicki et al. 2001; Krishan & Mahajan
2004; Galtier & Buchlin 2007; Howes et al. 2007).

29

hχiRe ≃ hφiRe . The electron gyrokinetic equation then is


∂he
∂he c
∂he
,
(244)
+ vk
+ {hφiRe , he } =
∂t
∂z B0
∂t c
where the wave-particle interaction term in the right-hand side
has been dropped because it can be shown to be small via the
same argument as in § 7.5.2.
Together with Eq. (240), Eq. (244) describes the kinetic cascade of electron entropy from the electron gyroscale down to
the scale at which electron collisions can dissipate it into heat.
This cascade the result of collisionless damping of KAW at
k⊥ ρe ∼ 1, whereby the power in the KAW cascade is converted into the electron-entropy fluctuations: indeed, in the
limit k⊥ ρe ≫ 1, the generalized energy is simply
Z
Z
T0e h2e
3
.
(245)
W = d v d 3 Re
2F0e
The same scaling arguments as in § 7.5.2 apply and scaling
relations analogous to Eqs. (233-235), and (237) duly follow:
r
n0e me  εKAW 1/3 1 −1/3 1/6 1/6
√ l0 ρe λ , (246)
heλ ∼ 3
ε
vthe mi
βi
ε
1/3
KAW
−1/3 1/6 7/6
Φλ ∼
(247)
vA l0 ρe λ ,
ε
1/3 1/3 1/3 1/3

l0 ρe λ
ε
,
(248)
∼
εKAW
vA
r
me  εKAW 1/3 −1/3 −11/6 13/6
δBλ
λ .
(249)
l0 ρe
∼ βi
B0
mi
ε

The formula for the collisional cutoffs in the wavenumber and
velocity space is analogous to Eq. (223):
δv⊥
1
∼
∼ (νei τρe )3/5 ,
vthi
k ⊥ ρi

(250)

where τρe is the cascade time (248) taken at λ = ρe .
7.7. Validity of Gyrokinetics in the Dissipation Range

As the kinetic cascade takes the (generalized) energy to ever
smaller scales, the frequency ω of the fluctuations increases.
In applying the gyrokinetic theory, one must be mindful of
the need for this frequency to stay smaller than Ωi . Using
the scaling formulae for the characteristic times of the fluctuations derived above [Eqs. (219), (235) and (248)], we can
determine the conditions for ω ≪ Ωi . Thus, for the gyrokinetic theory to be valid everywhere in the inertial range, we
must have
3/4

k⊥ ρi ≪ βi (l0 /ρi )1/2

(251)
3/2

at all scales down to k⊥ ρi ∼ 1, i.e., ρi /l0 ≪ βi , not a very
stringent condition.
Below the ion gyroscale, the KAW cascade (§ 7.2) remains
in the gyrokinetic regime as long as
k⊥ ρi ≪ (ε/εKAW)1/4 βi (1 + βi )1/4 (l0 /ρi )1/4 .
3/8

(252)

The condition for this still to be true at the electron gyroscale is
 2
ε
me
ρi
3/2
≪
βi (1 + βi)
.
(253)
l0
εKAW
mi

30

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

The ion entropy fluctuations passively mixed by the KAW turbulence (§ 7.4) satisfy Eq. (252) at all scales down to the the
ion collisional cutoff [Eq. (223)] if
 1/4
3/4

λmfpi
ε
9/8
3/4 ρi
≪
βi (1 + βi)
.
(254)
l0
εKAW
l0
Note that the condition for the ion collisional cutoff to lie
above the electron gyroscale is
1/3

 5/6  2/3
p
λmfpi
ρi
ε
mi
1/3
≪
.
βi (1 + βi)
l0
εKAW
me
l0
(255)
In the absence of KAW turbulence, the pure ion-entropy
casacade (§ 7.5) remains gyrokinetic for
3/2

k⊥ ρi ≪ βi (l0 /ρi ).

(256)

This is valid at all scales down to the ion collisional cutoff
provided λmfpi /l0 ≪ βi3 (l0 /ρi ), an extremely weak condition,
which is always satisfied. This is because the ion-entropy
fluctuations in this case have much lower frequencies than in
the KAW regime. The ion collisional cutoff lies above the
electron gyroscale if, similarly to Eq. (255),
 5/6  2/3
p
λmfpi
ρi
mi
≪ βi
.
(257)
l0
me
l0

If the condition (255) is satisfied, all fluctuations of the ion
distribution function are damped out above the electron gyroscale. This means that below this scale, we only need the
electron gyrokinetic equation to be valid, i.e., ω ≪ Ωe . The
electron-entropy cascade (§ 7.6) satisfies this condition for
3/2

k⊥ ρe ≪ (ε/εKAW)βi (mi /me )3/2 (l0 /ρe ).

(258)

This is valid at all scales down to the electron
collisional cutoff [Eq. (250)] provided λmfpe /l0 ≪
(ε/εKAW)2 βi3 (mi /me )3 (l0 /ρe ), which is always satisfied.
Within the formal
expansion we have adopted (k⊥ ρi ∼ 1
√
and kk λmfpi ∼ βi ), it is not hard to see that λmfpi /l0 ∼ ǫ2
and ρi /l0 ∼ ǫ3 . Since all other parameters (me /mi , βi , etc.)
are order unity with respect to ǫ, all of the above conditions
for the validity of the gyrokinetics are asymptotically correct
by construction. However, in application to real astrophysical
plasmas, one should always check whether this construction
holds. For example, substituting the relevant parameters for
the solar wind shows that the gyrokinetic approximation is,
in fact, likely to start breaking down somewhere between the
ion and electron gyroscales (Howes et al. 2007, see this paper also for a more detailed discussion of this point, a set of
numerical tests of the validity of gyrokinetics in the dissipation range, and a linear theory of the conversion of KAW into
ion-cyclotron-damped Bernstein waves).
7.8. Summary
In this section, we have analyzed the turbulence in the dissipation range, which turned out to have many more essentially
kinetic features than the inertial range.
At the ion gyroscale, k⊥ ρi ∼ 1, the kinetic cascade rearranged itself into two distinct components: part of the (generalized) energy arriving from the inertial range was collisionlessly damped, giving rise to a purely kinetic cascade of ionentropy fluctuations, the rest was converted into a cascade of
Kinetic Alfvén Waves (KAW).

The KAW cascade is described by two fluid-like equations
for two scalar functions, the magnetic flux function Ψ and the
scalar potential, expressed, for continuity with the results of
§ 5, in terms of the function Φ = (c/B0 )φ. The equations are
(see § 7.1)

∂Ψ
∇Φ,
(259)
= vA 1 + Z/τ b̂ *∇
∂t

vA
∂Φ
 b̂ *∇
∇ ρ2i ∇2⊥ Ψ ,
(260)
=−
∂t
2 + βi 1 + Z/τ

where b̂ * ∇ = ∂/∂z + (1/vA){Ψ, * * * }. The density and
magnetic-field-strength fluctuations are directly related to the
scalar potential:


δBk p
Z
δne
Φ
2 Φ
= −√
,
= βi 1 +
. (261)
n0e
B0
τ ρi v A
βi ρ i v A
We call Eqs. (259-261) the Electron Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (ERMHD).
The ion-entropy cascade is described by the ion gyrokinetic
equation:
∂hi
∂hi
(262)
+ vk
+ {hΦiRi , hi } = hCii [hi ]iRi .
∂t
∂z
The ion distribution function is mixed by the ring-averaged
scalar potential and undergoes a cascade both in the velocity
and gyrocenter space-this phase-space cascade is essential
for the conversion of the turbulent energy into the ion heat,
which can ultimately only be done by collisions (see § 7.4).
If the KAW cascade is strong (its power εKAW is an orderunity fraction of the total injected turbulent power ε), it determines Φ in Eq. (262), so the ion-entropy cascade is passive
with respect to the KAW turbulence. Equations (259-260) and
(262) form a closed system that determines the three functions Φ, Ψ, hi , of which the latter is slaved to the first two.
One can also compute δne and δBk , which are proportional
to Φ [Eq. (261)]. The generalized energy conserved by these
equations is given by Eq. (210).
If the KAW cascade is weak (εKAW ≪ ε), the ion-entropy
cascade dominates the turbulence in the dissipation range and
drives low-frequency mostly electrostatic fluctuations, with a
subdominant magnetic component. These are given by the
following relations (see § 7.5)
√
Z
ρi vA βi X ik*r 1
e
d 3 v J0 (ai )hik ,
(263)
Φ=
2(1 + τ /Z)
n0i
k

2 Z Φ
δne
=√
,
n0e
βi τ ρ i v A
p X ik*r
e ×
Ψ = ρ i βi

(264)

k


i ∂
J0 (ai )
1
− vk
h , (265)
2 ρ2 ik
1 + Z/τ kk ∂t
k⊥
i
Z
δBk
βi X ik*r 1
2v2 J1 (ai )
=−
hik ,
(266)
e
d 3 v 2⊥
B0
2
n0i
vthi ai
1
n0i

Z

3

d v



k

where ai = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωi , Equations (262) and (263) form a closed
system for Φ and hi . The rest of the fields, namely δne , Ψ and
δBk , are slaved to hi via Eqs. (264-266).
The fluid and kinetic models summarized above are valid
between the ion and electron gyroscales. Below the electron
gyroscale, the collisionless damping of the KAW cascade converts it into a cascade of electron entropy, similar in nature to
the ion-entropy cascade (§ 7.6).

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
The KAW cascade and the low-frequency turbulence associated with the ion-entropy cascade have distinct scaling behaviors. For the KAW cascade, the spectra of the electric,
density and magnetic fluctuations are (§ 7.2)
−1/3

EE (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥ ,

−7/3

En (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥ ,

−7/3

EB (k⊥ ) ∝ k⊥ . (267)

For the ion- and electron-entropy cascades (§ 7.4 and § 7.6),
EE (k⊥ ) ∝

−4/3
k⊥ ,

En (k⊥ ) ∝

−10/3
k⊥ ,

EB (k⊥ ) ∝

−16/3
k⊥ .

(268)
We argued in § 7.5.5 that the observed spectra in the dissipation range of the solar wind could be the result of a superposition of these two cascades.
8. DISCUSSION OF ASTROPHYSICAL APPLICATIONS

We have so far only occasionally referred to some relevant
observational evidence for the solar wind and the ISM. We
now discuss in more detail how the theoretical framework laid
out above applies to these and other astrophysical plasmas.
8.1. Solar Wind
The solar wind is a unique laboratory for studying plasma
turbulence in astrophysical conditions because it is the only
case in which direct in situ measurements of all interesting
quantities are possible. Observations of the fluctuating magnetic and velocity fields have been possible since the 1960s
(Coleman 1968) and a vast literature now exists on their spectra, anisotropy, Alfvénic character and many other aspects (a
short recent review is Horbury et al. 2005; two long ones are
Bruno & Carbone 2005; Marsch 2006). It is not our aim here
to provide a comprehensive survey of what is known about
plasma turbulence in the solar wind. We shall limit our discussion to a few points that we consider important. A more
extended and quantitative discussion of the application of the
gyrokinetic theory to the turbulence in the slow solar wind
was given by Howes et al. (2007).
8.1.1. Alfvénic Nature of Turbulence

The presence of Alfvén waves in the solar wind has been
a confirmed fact since Belcher & Davis (1971). These are
detected at low frequencies (large scales)-their spectral
signature is a f −1 spectrum of magnetic-field fluctuations,
where, by the Taylor (1938) hypothesis, the frequency-towave-number relationship is f ∼ k * Vsw , where Vsw is the
solar-wind mean velocity (it is highly supersonic and superAlfvénic and far exceeds the fluctuating velocities: Vsw ∼
800 km/s in the fast wind, Vsw ∼ 300 km/s in the slow
wind). The f −1 spectrum corresponds to a uniform distribution of scales/frequencies of waves launched by the coronal activity near the Sun. Nonlinear interaction of these
waves gives rise to an Alfvénic turbulent cascade of the
type that was discussed above. The effective outer scale
of this cascade can be detected as a break point where
the f −1 scaling steepens to the Kolmogorov slope f −5/3
(Bavassano et al. 1982; Horbury et al. 1996). The particular
scale at which this happens increases with the distance from
the Sun (Bavassano et al. 1982), reflecting the more developed state of the turbulence at later stages of evolution. At
1 AU, the outer scale is roughly in the range of 105 − 106 km;
the f −5/3 range extends down to frequencies that correspond
to a few times the ion gyroradius (102 − 103 km; see Table 1).
The strongest confirmation of the Alfvénic nature of the
turbulence in the f −5/3 range is achieved by comparing the

31

spectra of electric and magnetic fluctuations-these follow
each other with remarkable precision (Bale et al. 2005), as
they should do for Alfvénic fluctuations. Indeed, as we
showed in § 5.3, for k⊥ ρi ≫ 1, these fluctuations are rigorously described by the RMHD equations and we should have
cφ/B0 ≡ Φ = ±Ψ (see § 2.2 and § 2.4), whence

v2
B20 2
k⊥ |Ψk |2 = A2 |δB⊥k |2
(269)
2
c
c
(in other words, to lowest order in ǫ and k⊥ ρi , the plasma
velocity is the E × B drift velocity, u⊥ = cE
√ × ẑ/B0 , which, in
an Alfvén wave, should be u⊥ = ±δB⊥ / 4πmi n0i ).
It is an important point that very high accuracy is claimed
for the determination of the f −5/3 scaling in the solar wind
observations: the measured spectral exponent is between
1.6 and 1.7; agreement with Kolmogorov value 1.67 is often reported to be within ±0.01 (e.g., Horbury et al. 1996;
Leamon et al. 1998; Bale et al. 2005; Horbury et al. 2007;
see, however, a somewhat wider scatter of spectral indices
given by Smith et al. 2006 and a puzzling recent result by
Podesta et al. 2006, who claim different spectral indices for
velocity and magnetic fluctuations-3/2 and 5/3, respectively!). Thus, the data does not appear to be consistent
−3/2
with a k⊥ spectrum observed in the MHD simulations with
a strong mean field (Maron & Goldreich 2001; Müller et al.
2003) and defended on theoretical grounds in a recent modification of the GS theory by Boldyrev (2006). This discrepancy
between observations and simulations, as well as the validity of Boldyrev's polarization-alignment hypothesis, remain
an unresolved theoretical issue. It is probably best addressed
by higher-resolution numerical modeling of the RMHD equations (§ 2.2) and by a detailed analysis of the structure of the
Alfvénic fluctuations measured in the solar wind.
2
|Ek |2 = k⊥
|φk |2 =

8.1.2. Anisotropy

The solar wind presents the best hope for a quantitative
2/3
check of the GS relation kk ∼ k⊥ [see Eq. (4)] in a real astrophysical turbulent plasma. Studies of anisotropy of turbulent fluctuations have progressed from merely detecting
their elongation along the magnetic field (Belcher & Davis
1971)-to fitting data to an ad hoc model mixing a 2D perpendicular and a 1D parallel ("slab") turbulent component in
some proportion (Matthaeus et al. 1990; Bieber et al. 1996;
Dasso et al. 2005)-to formal systematic unbiased analyses
showing the persistent presence of anisotropy at all scales
(Bigazzi et al. 2006; Sorriso-Valvo et al. 2006)-and finally
to computing spectral exponents at fixed angles between k
and B0 (Horbury et al. 2007). The latter authors appear to
have achieved the first direct confirmation of the GS theory
by demonstrating that the magnetic-energy spectrum scales
−5/3
as k⊥ in wave numbers perpendicular to the mean field and
as kk−2 in wave numbers parallel to it [consistent with the first
relation in Eq. (4)].
Latest measurements done by the four-spacecraft Cluster
mission offer a promise of direct detailed studies of the threedimensional spatial structure of the turbulent fluctuations in
the solar wind (Osman & Horbury 2007; Sahraoui et al. 2006;
Narita et al. 2006).
8.1.3. Density and Magnetic-Field-Strength Fluctuations

The density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations constitute the passive component of the low (Alfvénic) frequency

32

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

turbulence, energetically decoupled from and mixed by the
Alfvénic cascade (§ 5.5; these are slow and entropy modes
in the collisional MHD limit-see § 2.3). These fluctuations
ought to be pressure-balanced, as expressed by Eq. (17) or,
more generally in gyrokinetics, by Eq. (60). There is, indeed,
strong evidence that magnetic and thermal pressures in the
solar wind are anticorrelated, although there are some indications of the presence compressive, fast-wave-like fluctuations
as well (see Marsch & Tu 1993; Bavassano et al. 2004, and
references therein).
Measurements of density and field-strength fluctuations done by a variety of different methods both at
1 AU and near the Sun (Celnikier et al. 1983, 1987;
Coles & Harmon 1989; Marsch & Tu 1990; Coles et al.
1991; Bershadskii & Sreenivasan 2004; Hnat et al. 2005;
Kellogg & Horbury 2005) consistently show fluctuation levels of order 10% and spectra that have a k−5/3 scaling above
scales of order 102 − 103 km, which approximately corresponds to the ion gyroscale. The Kolmogorov value of the
spectral exponent is, as in the case of Alfvénic fluctuations,
measured quite accurately (1.67 ± 0.03 in Celnikier et al.
1987). Considering that in the collisionless regime these fluctuations are supposed to be subject to strong kinetic damping (§ 6.2), the presence of well-developed Kolmogorov-like
and apparently undamped turbulent spectra should be more
surprising than has perhaps been acknowledged. A discussion of this issue was given in § 6.3. Without the inclusion
of the dissipation effects associated with the finite ion gyroscale, the passive cascade of the density and field strength
is purely perpendicular to the (exact) local magnetic field and
does not lead to any scale refinement along the field. This implies highly anisotropic field-aligned structures, for which the
kinetic damping is inefficient. While this would seem to explain the presence of fully-fledged Kolmogorov spectra, it is
not entirely obvious that the parallel cascade is really absent
once dissipation is taken into account (Lithwick & Goldreich
2001), so the issue is not yet settled. This said, we note that
there is plenty of evidence of a high degree of anisotropy
and field alignment of the density microstructure in the inner solar wind and outer corona (e.g., Armstrong et al. 1990;
Grall et al. 1997; Woo & Habbal 1997). Further suggestions
for an observational study that could settle this issue are outlined at the end of § 6.3.
8.1.4. Dissipation at the Ion Gyroscale

At scales of the order of the ion gyroscale, several dissipation mechanisms become important. Observations are not
consistent with cyclotron damping being the main mechanism
for the dissipation of the inertial-range Alfvénic turbulence at
the ion gyroscale (Leamon et al. 1998)-not a surprising result in view of the theory presented above, in which the Alfvén
frequency is much smaller than the cyclotron frequency even
for k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 [see Eq. (46)]. While the cyclotron resonance
is not important, the Barnes (1966) one (§ 6.2) should be. Indeed, when k⊥ ρi ∼ 1, the Alfvénic fluctuations are no longer
decoupled from the density and magnetic-field-strength fluctuations. It should be possible to convert at least some fraction of the energy of the Alfvénic cascade into the latter,
and then dissipate it via collisionless damping (the gyrokinetic limit of this with finite k⊥ ρi is calculated in Howes et al.
2006). We might argue that it is the inflow of energy from the
Alfvénic cascade that accounts for a pronounced local flattening of the spectrum of density fluctuations in the solar wind
observed just above the ion gyroscale (Celnikier et al. 1983,

1987; Coles & Harmon 1989; Marsch & Tu 1990; Coles et al.
1991; Kellogg & Horbury 2005).19
Since the neglect of the effect of collisions on the Alfvén
waves in § 5.3 was predicated on the smallness of k⊥ ρi (see
Appendices B.1 and B.2), collisional dissipation may also
play a role at the ion gyroscale unless the collision frequency
is much smaller than the fluctuation frequency and the role of
collisions is merely to enable the irreversibility of the "collisionless" damping (see § 3.5 and §§ 7.4-7.5)-the latter limit
is probably more relevant to the highly collisionless case of
the solar wind.
8.1.5. Fluctuations in the Dissipation Range

If not all of the energy is dissipated at the ion gyroscale (into
ion heat), a kinetic-Alfvén-wave cascade (§ 7.1 and § 7.2)
is possible below this scale-in what is known as "the dissipation range" in the solar-wind literature. The cascade
is damped at the electron gyroscale via the electron Landau damping and converted into electron heat (the expression for the damping rate in the gyrokinetic limit is given in
Howes et al. 2006).
KAW have, indeed, been detected in the solar wind
(Grison et al. 2005). The spectra of electric and magnetic
fluctuations below the ion gyroscale reported by Bale et al.
(2005) are consistent with k−1/3 and k−7/3 -a result that gives
some observational backing to the theoretical predictions
based on assuming an anisotropic critically balanced KAW
cascade (§ 7.2; see Schekochihin et al. 2007a for theoretical
scaling fits superimposed on a plot taken from Bale et al.
2005; note, however, that Bale et al. 2005 themselves interpreted their data in a somewhat different way and that
their resolution was in any case not sufficient to be sure of
the scalings). The anisotropy of the fluctuations below the
ion gyroscale was corroborated by Leamon et al. 1998, who,
however, reported steeper magnetic-fluctuation spectra (with
spectral exponent ≃ −4), although they too thought they were
seeing KAW.
Analysis of many different measurements of the magneticfluctuation spectra in the dissipation range of the solar wind
reveals a wide spread in the spectral indices (roughly between
−1 and −4; see Smith et al. 2006). There is evidence of a
weak positive correlation between steeper dissipation-range
spectra and higher ion temperatures (Leamon et al. 1998) or
higher dissipation rates calculated from the inertial range
(Smith et al. 2006). This suggests that a larger amount of ion
heating corresponds to a fully or partially suppressed KAW
cascade, which is in line with the view of the ion heating
and the KAW cascade as the two competing channels of the
overall kinetic cascade (§ 7.3). With a weakened KAW cascade, all or part of the dissipation range is dominated by
the ion entropy cascade-a purely kinetic phenomenon manifested by predominantly electrostatic fluctuations and very
steep magnetic-energy spectra (§ 7.5). This might account
both for the steepness of the observed spectra and for the
spread in their indices (§ 7.5.5).
It is fair to admit, however, that there is currently no satisfactory quantitative or even qualitative theory that would allow us to predict when the KAW cascade is present and when
it is not. Resolution both of this issue and of the related ques19 Celnikier et al. (1987) proposed that the flattening might be a k−1 spectrum analogous to Batchelor's spectrum of passive scalar variance in the
viscous-convective range. We think this explanation is incorrect because density is not passive at or below the ion gyroscale.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

33

tion of which fraction of the turbulent power injected at the
outer scale ends up in the ion vs. the electron heat requires
careful numerical modeling-the minimal model appropriate
for such simulations is the system of equations for isothermal
electrons and gyrokinetic ions derived in § 4.
The density spectra measured by Celnikier et al. (1983,
1987) steepen below the ion gyroscale following the flattened
segment around k⊥ ρi ∼ 1 discussed in § 8.1.4. For a KAW
cascade, the density spectrum should be k−7/3 (§ 7.2); without KAW, k−10/3 (§ 7.5.2). The observed slope appears to be
somewhat shallower even than k−2 , but, given imperfect resolution, neither seriously in contradiction with the KAW cascade, nor sufficient to corroborate it. Unfortunately, we could
not find published simultaneous measurements of densityand magnetic-fluctuation spectra-such measurements would
provide a better description of the dissipation range and a possibly a way to distinguish between various theories.
Finally, a caveat is in order that a properly asymptotic behavior in the dissipation range is probably impossible in nature because the scale separation is only about (mi /me )1/2 ≃
43 between the ion and electron gyroscales [Eq. (41)]. We
refer the reader to the paper by Howes et al. (2007) for a discussion of how this lack of asymptoticity, namely the fact that
the kinetic damping is not very small anywhere in the dissipation range, could be responsible for the observed spectra.

proposed, although there does exist a vast space-physics literature on the subject, which will not be reviewed here. It
appears to be a plausible assumption that the fluctuations
resulting from temperature anisotropy will scatter particles
and limit the anisotropy. This idea has some support in the
solar-wind observations: the core particle distribution is only
moderately anisotropic and consistent with a marginal state
with respect to the instability conditions (Gary et al. 2001;
Marsch et al. 2004; Kasper et al. 2002; Hellinger et al. 2006,
see also Kellogg et al. 2006 for measurements of the electricfield fluctuations in the ion-cyclotron frequency range and estimates of the resulting velocity-space diffusion-claimed to
be sufficient to isotropize the ion distribution). This means
that assuming a Maxwellian equilibrium is probably an acceptable simplification in treating the turbulence above the ion
gyroscale. The status of this simplification for fluctuations at
or below the ion gyroscale is more problematic. Further theoretical work is necessary to correctly describe this scale range
in the parts of the solar wind or the terrestrial magnetosphere
where temperature anisotropy is observed and also to have
a clear understanding of the circumstances under which this
anisotropy occurs. The particle scattering by high-frequency
fluctuations may also affect the turbulent cascades of the lowfrequency fluctuations discussed in this paper by changing the
effective value of the mean free path-another matter requiring further investigation.

8.1.6. Is the Equilibrium Distribution Isotropic?

8.2. Interstellar Medium

Throughout this paper, we have emphasized that we consider weakly collisional plasmas. The collision frequency was
ordered √
similar to the fluctuation frequency and, therefore,
kk λmfpi / βi ∼ 1 [Eq. (40)]. This meant that we could proceed to treat both collisional and collisionless
scales via sub√
sidiary expansions in kk λmfpi or in 1/ βi (see § 6). It turns
out that this degree of collisionality is sufficient to prove that
an isotropic Maxwellian equilibrium distribution F0s (v) does
indeed emerge in the lowest order of the gyrokinetic expansion (Howes et al. 2006).
This argument works very well for plasmas such as the
ISM, where collisions are weak (λmfpi ≫ ρi ) but nonnegligible (λmfpi ≪ L). In the solar wind, the mean free path
is of the the order of 1 AU-the distance between the Sun
and the Earth (see Table 1). Strictly speaking, in so highly
collisionless a plasma, the equilibrium distribution does not
have to be either Maxwellian or isotropic. The conservation of the first adiabatic invariant, μ = v2⊥ /2B, suggests that
temperature anisotropy with respect to the magnetic-field direction (T0⊥ 6= T0k ) may exist. Such anisotropy gives rise
to several high-frequency plasma instabilities: most prominently the firehose (T0⊥ < T0k ), mirror and ion cyclotron
(T0⊥ > T0k ) modes (e.g., Gary et al. 1976). Their growth rates
peak around the ion gyroscale, giving rise to small-scale fluctuations at this scale and possibly an energy cascade below it.
Thus, a broad spectrum of mirror structures at and below the
ion gyroscale has been clearly identified by some of the spacecraft measurements (e.g., in the terrestrial magnetosheath; see
Lucek et al. 2001; Sahraoui et al. 2006).20
No definitive analytical theory of such fluctuations has been

While the solar wind is unmatched by any other astrophysical plasma in the level of detail with which turbulence in it
can be measured, the interstellar medium also provides an observer with a fair number of ways to diagnose plasma turbulence, which, in the case of ISM, is probably stirred by the
supernova explosions (Norman & Ferrara 1996). The accuracy and resolution of this analysis are due to improve rapidly
thanks to many new observatories, e.g., LOFAR,21 Planck
(Ensslin et al. 2006), and, in more distant future, the SKA
(Lazio et al. 2004).
The ISM is a spatially inhomogeneous environment consisting of several phases that have different temperatures, densities and degrees of ionization (Ferrière 2001) (and, therefore,
different degrees of importance of the neutral particles and
the associated ambipolar damping effects-these will not be
discussed here; see Lithwick & Goldreich 2001). We will use
the Warm ISM phase (see Table 1) as our fiducial interstellar plasma and discuss briefly what is known about the two
main observationally accessible quantities-the electron density and magnetic fields-and what this information means.

20 Remarkably, these structures are highly anisotropic with k ≪ k .
⊥
k
They cannot, however, be described by the gyrokinetic theory in its present
form because δBk /B0 is very large (∼ 40%, occasionally reaching unity)
and because the particle trapping effect, which is likely to be essential in
the nonlinear physics of the mirror instability (Kivelson & Southwood 1996;
Schekochihin et al. 2007d), is ordered out in gyrokinetics.

8.2.1. Electron Density Fluctuations

The electron-density fluctuations inferred from the interstellar scintillation measurements appear to have a spectrum
with an exponent ≃ −1.7, consistent with the Kolmogorov
scaling (Armstrong et al. 1995; Lazio et al. 2004; see, however, dissenting evidence by Smirnova et al. 2006, who claim
a spectral exponent closer to −1.5). This holds over about 5
decades of scales λ ∈ (105 , 1010 ) km. Other observational evidence at larger and smaller scales supports the case for this
presumed inertial range to be extended over as many as 12
decades: λ ∈ (102 , 1015 ) km, a fine example of scale separation that prompted the impressed astrophysics community to
dub the density scaling "The Great Power Law in the Sky."
21

http://www.lofar.org

34

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

The upper cutoff here is consistent with the estimates of the
supernova scale of order 100 pc-presumably the outer scale
of the turbulence (Norman & Ferrara 1996) and also roughly
the scale height of the galactic disk, hence the absolute upper
limit of validity of any homogeneous model of the ISM turbulence. The lower cutoff is an estimate for the inner scale
below which the logarithmic slope of the density spectrum
steepens to values around −2 (Spangler & Gwinn 1990).
Higdon (1984) was the first to realize that the electrondensity fluctuations in the ISM could be explained as due
to a cascade of passive tracer [the MHD entropy mode, see
Eq. (18)] mixed by the ambient turbulence. This idea was
brought to maturity by Lithwick & Goldreich (2001), who
studied the passive cascades of the slow and entropy modes in
the framework of the GS theory (see also Maron & Goldreich
2001). If the turbulence is assumed anisotropic, as in the
GS theory, the passive nature of the density fluctuations
with respect to the decoupled Alfvén-wave cascade becomes
a rigorous result both in MHD (§ 2.3) and, as we showed
above, in the more general gyrokinetic description appropriate for weakly collisional plasmas (§ 5.5). Anisotropy of
the electron-density fluctuations in the ISM is, indeed, observationally supported (Wilkinson et al. 1994; Trotter et al.
1998; Rickett et al. 2002; Dennett-Thorpe & de Bruyn 2003,
see also Lazio et al. 2004 for a concise discussion of these results), although detailed scale-by-scale measurements are not
currently possible.
If the underlying Alfvén-wave turbulence in the ISM has
−5/3
a k⊥ spectrum, as predicted by GS, so should the electron density. As we discussed in § 6.3, the physical nature
of the inner scale for the density fluctuations depends on
whether they have a cascade in kk and are efficiently damped
when kk λmfpi ∼ 1 or fail to develop small parallel scales and
can, therefore, reach k⊥ ρi ∼ 1. The observationally estimated inner scale is consistent with being the ion gyroscale,
ρi ∼ 103 km (see Table 1; note that the ion inertial scale
−1/2
d i = ρ i βi
is similar to ρi at the moderate values of βi characteristic of the ISM). However, since the mean free path in the
ISM is not huge (Table 1), it is not possible to distinguish this
3/2
from the perpendicular cutoff λmfpi L−1/2 ∼ 500 km implied
by the parallel cutoff at kk λmfpi ∼ 1 [see Eq. (195)], as advocated by Lithwick & Goldreich (2001). Note that the relatively short mean free path means that much of the scale range
spanned by the Great Power Law in the Sky is, in fact, well
described by the MHD approximation either with adiabatic
(§ 2) or isothermal (§ 6.1) electrons.
Below the ion gyroscale, the −2 spectral exponent reported
by Spangler & Gwinn (1990) is measured sufficiently imprecisely to be consistent with the −7/3 expected for the density
fluctuations in the KAW cascade (§ 7.2). However, given the
high degree of uncertainty about what happens in this "dissipation range" even in the much better resolved case of the solar wind (§ 8.1.5), it would probably be wise to reserve judgement until better data is available.
8.2.2. Magnetic Fluctuations

The second main observable type of turbulent fluctuations
in the ISM are the magnetic fluctuations, accessible indirectly
via the measurements of the Faraday rotation of the polarization angle of the pulsar light travelling through the ISM.
The structure function of the rotation measure (RM) should
have the Kolmogorov slope of 2/3 if the magnetic fluctuations are due to Alfvénic turbulence described by the GS the-

ory. There is a considerable uncertainty in interpreting the
available data, primarily due to insufficient spatial resolution
(rarely better than a few parsec). Structure function slopes
consistent with 2/3 have been reported (Minter & Spangler
1996), but, depending on where one looks, shallower structure functions that seem to steepen at scales of a few parsec
are also observed (Haverkorn et al. 2004). A recent study by
Haverkorn et al. (2005) detected an interesting trend: the RM
structure functions computed for several regions that lie in
the galactic spiral arms are nearly perfectly flat down to the
resolution limit, while in the interarm regions, they have detectable slopes (although these are mostly shallower that 2/3).
Observations of magnetic fields in external galaxies also reveal a marked difference in the magnetic-field structure between arms and interarms: the spatially regular (mean) fields
are stronger in the interarms, while in the arms, the stochastic
fields dominate (Beck 2006). These facts prompt us to return
a very important physics issue, which was briefly raised in
§ 1.3 but otherwise ignored in this paper.
8.2.3. MHD Turbulence with and without a Mean Field

The theory of MHD turbulence as turbulence of Alfvénic
fluctuations depends on the presence of a mean (guide) field
B0 that is strong compared to the magnetic fluctuations,
δB/B0 ∼ u/vA ≪ 1 (§ 2.1). Kraichnan (1965) argued that in a
generic situation in which all magnetic fields are produced by
the turbulence itself via the dynamo mechanism, one might
assume that the strongest field will be at the outer scale and
then view this outer-scale field as the approximately uniform
guide field for the inertial-range Alfvén waves. It is, however, by no means obvious that this should be true. When a
strong mean field is imposed by some external mechanism,
the turbulent motions cannot bend it significantly, so only
small Alfvénic (or slow-wave-like) perturbations are possible
and δBrms ≪ B0 . In contrast, without a strong imposed field,
the energy density of the magnetic fluctuations is at most comparable to the kinetic-energy density of the plasma motions,
which are then sufficiently energetic to randomly tangle the
field, so δBrms ≫ B0 .
In the weak-mean-field case, the dynamically strong
stochastic magnetic field is a result of saturation of the
small-scale dynamo-amplification of magnetic field due to
random stretching by the turbulent motions (see review by
Schekochihin & Cowley 2006b). The definitive theory of the
saturated state remains to be discovered. Both physical arguments and numerical evidence (Schekochihin et al. 2004;
Yousef et al. 2007) suggest that magnetic field is organized in
folded flux sheets/ribbons. The length of the folds is comparable to the stirring scale, while the scale of the field-direction
reversals transverse to the fold is determined by the dissipation physics: in MHD with isotropic viscosity and resistivity, it is the resistive scale.22 The structure functions of such
magnetic fields are flat (Yousef et al. 2007), with the magnetic
energy dominantly at the reversal scale (see Haugen et al.
2004 for an alternative view). Although Alfvén waves propagating along the folds may exist (Schekochihin et al. 2004;
Schekochihin & Cowley 2006b), the presence of the smallscale direction reversals means that there is no scale-by-scale
equipartition between the velocity and magnetic fields: while
22 In weakly collisional astrophysical plasmas, such a description is not
applicable: the field reversal scale is most probably determined by more
complicated and as yet poorly understood kinetic plasma effects; below this
scale, an Alfvénic turbulence of the kind discussed in this paper may exist
(Schekochihin & Cowley 2006a).

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
the magnetic energy is small-scale dominated due to the direction reversals, the kinetic energy (the velocity dispersion)
should be contained primarily at the supernova-forcing scale,
with some scaling law (probably Kolmogorov) in the inertial
range. The density fluctuations, being passive, should follow
the velocity scaling.
8.2.4. Spiral Arms vs. Interarm Regions

Thus, there are two asymptotic regimes of MHD turbulence: (I) anisotropic Alfvénic turbulence with δBrms ≫ B0
and (II) isotropic MHD turbulence with small-scale field reversals and δBrms ≪ B0 . The qualitative difference between
the magnetic-field structure in the Galactic spiral arms and
interarms discovered by Haverkorn et al. (2005) might then
be attributed to the turbulence in these regions being of two
different kinds: it is closer to the anisotropic variety (I) in
the interarms and to the isotropic one (II) in the arms. There
are several conspiring reasons for this simplest and, therefore,
tempting explanation to also be a plausible one:
(i) the arms are denser than the interarms by a factor of a
few (roughly 4; see Roberts & Hausman 1984) and observed
to support stronger turbulence (roughly a factor or 2; see
Rohlfs & Kreitschmann 1987), which is not surprising as the
concentration of supernovae is higher;
(ii) the presence of the spiral mean field in galaxies
is usually attributed to some form of mean-field dynamo
(Krause & Rädler 1980) and it is possible to argue that this
mechanism produces stronger mean fields in the interarms
than in the arms (Shukurov 1998; Shukurov & Sokoloff 1998;
Rohde & Elstner 1998; Rohde et al. 1998);
(iii) the mean field should be pushed out of the more
turbulent region (arms) into the less turbulent one (interarms) by the turbulent diamagnetism (Zeldovich 1957;
Krause & Rädler 1980).
Thus, urms is larger and B0 smaller in the arms, so
δBrms /B0 ∼ urms /vA should be smaller in the arms than in the
interarms. Numerical simulations of an inhomogeneously turbulent MHD fluid (Iskakov et al. 2007) lend qualitative support to these ideas.
8.3. Accretion Disks

Accretion of plasma onto a central black hole or neutron
star is responsible for many of the most energetic phenomena
observed in astrophysics (see, e.g., Narayan & Quataert 2005
for a review). It is now believed that a linear instability of differentially rotating plasmas-the magnetorotational instability (MRI)-amplifies magnetic fields and gives rise to MHD
turbulence in astrophysical disks (Balbus & Hawley 1998).
Magnetic stresses due to this turbulence transport angular momentum, allowing plasma to accrete. The MRI converts the
gravitational potential energy of the inflowing plasma into
tutbulence at the outer scale that is comparable to the scale
height of the disk. This energy is then cascaded to small
scales and dissipated into heat-powering the radiation that
we see from accretion flows. Fluid MHD simulations show
that the MRI-generated turbulence in disks is subsonic and
has β ∼ 10 − 100. Thus, on scales much smaller than the scale
height of the disk, the models developed in this paper should
provide a good description of the turbulent fluctuations and a
step forward compared to the the purely fluid approach. Turbulence is not yet directly observable in disks, so models of
turbulence are mostly used to produce testable predictions of
observable properties of disks such as their X-ray and radio
emission. One of the best observed cases is the (presumed)

35

accretion flow onto the black hole coincident with the radio
source Sgr A∗ in the center of our Galaxy (see review by
Quataert 2003).
Depending on the rate of heating and cooling in the inflowing plasma (which in turn depend on accretion rate and other
properties of the system under consideration), there are different models that describe the physical properties of accretion
flows onto a central object. In one class of models, a geometrically thin optically thick accretion disk (Shakura & Sunyaev
1973), the inflowing plasma is cold and dense and well described as an MHD fluid. When applied to Sgr A∗ , these
models produce a prediction for its total luminosity that is
several orders of magnitude larger than observed. Another
class of models, which appears to be more consistent with the
observed properties of Sgr A∗ , is called radiatively inefficient
accretion flows (RIAFs; see Rees et al. 1982; Narayan & Yi
1995 and review by Quataert 2003 of the applications and observational constraints in Sgr A∗ ). In these models, the inflowing plasma near the black hole is believed to adopt a twotemperature configuration, with the ions (Ti ∼ 1011 − 1012 K)
hotter than the electrons (Te ∼ 109 − 1011 K).23 The electron
and ion thermodynamics decouple because the densities are
so low that the temperature equalization time ∼ νie−1 is longer
than the time for the plasma to flow into the black hole. Thus,
like the solar wind, RIAFs are macroscopically collisionless
plasmas (see Table 1 for plasma parameters in the Galactic
center; note that these parameters are so extreme that the gyrokinetic description, while probably better than the fluid one,
cannot be expected to be rigorously valid; at the very least, it
needs to be reformulated in a relativistic form). At the high
temperatures appropriate to RIAFs, electrons radiate energy
much more efficiently than the ions (by virtue of their much
smaller mass) and are, therefore, expected to contribute dominantly to the observed emission, while the thermal energy of
the ions is swallowed by the black hole. Since the plasma
is collisionless, the electron heating by turbulence largely determines the thermodynamics of the electrons and thus the
observable properties of RIAFs. The question of which fraction of the turbulent energy goes into ion and which into electron heating is, therefore, crucial for understanding accretion
flows-and the answer to this question depends on the detailed properties of the small-scale kinetic turbulence (e.g.,
Quataert & Gruzinov 1999; Sharma et al. 2007).
Since all of the turbulent power coming down the cascade
must be dissipated into either ion or electron heat, it is really
the amount of ion heating at the ion gyroscale that decides
how much energy is available to heat the electrons at their
(smaller) gyroscale. Again, as in the case of the solar wind
(§ 8.1.4 and § 8.1.5), the transition around the ion gyroscale
from the Alfvénic turbulence at k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 to the KAW turbulence at k⊥ ρi ≫ 1 emerges as a key unsolved problem.
8.4. Galaxy Clusters

Galaxy clusters are the largest plasma objects in the Universe. Like the other examples discussed above, the intracluster plasma is in the weakly collisional regime (see Table 1).
Fluctuations of electron density, temperature and of magnetic
fields are measured in clusters by X-ray and radio observatories, but the resolution is only just enough to claim that a
fairly broad scale range of fluctuations exists (Schuecker et al.
2004; Vogt & Ensslin 2005). No power-law scalings have yet
23 It is partly with this application in mind that we carried the general
temperature ratio in our calculations; see footnote 10.

36

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

been established beyond reasonable doubt.
What fundamentally hampers quantitative modeling of turbulence and related effects in clusters is that we do not have
a definite theory of the basic properties of the intracluster
medium: its (effective) viscosity, magnetic diffusivity or thermal conductivity. In a weakly collisional and strongly magnetized plasma, all of these depend on the structure of the
magnetic field (Braginskii 1965), which is shaped by the turbulence. If (or at scales where) a reasonable a priori assumption can be made about the field structure, further analytical
progress is possible: thus, the theoretical models presented in
this paper assume that the magnetic field is a sum of a slowly
varying in space "mean field" and small low-frequency perturbations (δB ≪ B0 ).
In fact, since clusters do not have mean fields of any magnitude that could be considered dynamically significant, but
do have stochastic fields, the MHD turbulence in clusters
falls into the weak-mean-field category (see § 8.2.3). The
magnetic field should be highly filamentary, organized in
long folded direction-reversing structures. It is not currently
known what determines the reversal scale.24 Observations,
while tentatively confirming the existence of very long filaments (Clarke & Ensslin 2006), suggest that the reversal scale
is much larger than the ion gyroscale: thus, the magneticenergy spectrum for the Hydra A cluster core reported by
Vogt & Ensslin (2005) peaks at around 1 kpc, compared to
ρi ∼ 105 km. Below this scale, an Alfvén-wave cascade
should exist (as is, indeed, suggested by Vogt & Ensslin's spectrum being roughly consistent with k−5/3 at scales below the
peak). As these scales are collisionless (λmfpi ∼ 100 pc in the
cores and ∼ 10 kpc in the bulk of the clusters), it is to this
turbulence that the theory developed in this paper should be
applicable.
Another complication exists, similar to that discussed in
§ 8.1.6: pressure anisotropies could give rise to fast plasma
instabilities whose growth rate peaks just above the ion gyroscale. As was pointed out by Schekochihin et al. (2005),
these are, in fact, an inevitable consequence of any large-scale
fluid motions that change the strength of the magnetic field.
Although a number of interesting and plausible arguments can
be made about the way the instabilities might determine the
magnetic-field structure (Schekochihin & Cowley 2006a), it
is not currently understood with any degree of certainty how
the small-scale fluctuations resulting from these instabilities
coexist with the Alfvénic cascade.
The uncertainties that result from this imperfect understanding of the nature of the intracluster medium are exemplified by the problem of its thermal conductivity. The magneticfield reversal scale in clusters is certainly not larger than the
electron diffusion scale, (mi /me )1/2 λmfpi , which varies from
a few kpc in the cores to a few hundred kpc in the bulk.
Therefore, the approximation of isothermal electron fluid
(§ 4) should apply at all scales below the reversal scale, where
δB ≪ B0 presumably holds. Even this, however, is not definitive. One could imagine the electrons being effectively adiabatic if (or in the regions where) the plasma instabilities give
rise to large fluctuations of the magnetic field (δB/B0 ∼ 1) at
the ion gyroscale (Schekochihin et al. 2007c,d), reducing the
mean free path to λmfpi ∼ ρi .
24 See Schekochihin & Cowley (2006a) for a detailed presentation of our
views on the interplay between turbulence, magnetic field and plasma effects in cluster; for further discussions and disagreements, see Ensslin & Vogt
(2006); Subramanian et al. (2006); Brunetti & Lazarian (2007).

The current state of the observational evidence does not
allow one to exclude either of these possibilities. Both
isothermal (Fabian et al. 2006; Sanders & Fabian 2006) and
nonisothermal (Markevitch & Vikhlinin 2007) coherent structures that appear to be shocks are observed. Disordered fluctuations of temperature can also be detected, which allows one
to infer an upper limit for the scale at which the isothermal
approximation can start being valid: thus, Markevitch et al.
(2003) find temperature variations at all scales down to ∼
100 kpc, which is the statistical limit that defines the spatial resolution of their tempearture map. In none of these or
similar measurements is the magnetic field data available that
would make possible a pointwise comparison of the magnetic
and thermal structure.
Because of this lack of information about the state of the
magnetized plasma in clusters, theories of the intracluster
medium are not sufficiently constrained by observations, so
no one theory is in a position to prevail. This uncertain state
of affairs might be improved by analyzing the observationally
much better resolved case of the solar wind.
9. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have considered magnetized plasma turbulence in the astrophysically prevalent regime of weak collisionality. We have shown how the energy injected at the
outer scale cascades in phase space eventually to increase
the entropy of the system and heat the particles. In the process, we have explained how one combines plasma physics
tools-in particular, the gyrokinetic theory-with ideas on
turbulent cascades to arrive at a hierarchy of tractable models of turbulence in various physically distinct scale intervals.
These models represent the branching pathways of the energy
cascade and make clear the "fluid" and "kinetic" aspects of
plasma turbulence.
A detailed outline of these developments was given in the
Introduction. Intermediate technical summaries were provided in § 4.9, § 5.7, and § 7.8. Our view of how the transformation of the large-scale turbulent energy into heat occurs
was encapsulated in the concept of kinetic cascade. It was
previewed in § 1.2 and developed quantitatively in §§ 3.4-3.5,
§ 4.7, § 5.6, and §§ 7.3-7.6. In § 8, we discussed at length the
ways in which all this is useful in understanding turbulence in
real astrophysical plasmas.
Following a series of analytical contributions that set
up the theoretical framework for astrophysical gyrokinetics, (Howes et al. 2006, 2007; Schekochihin et al. 2007a,b;
Abel et al. 2007, and this paper) an extensive programme of
fluid (T. A. Yousef et al. 2007, in preparation), mixed fluidkinetic (T. Tatsuno et al. 2007, in preparation), and gyrokinetic25 (G. G. Howes et al. 2007, in preparation) numerical
simulations of magnetized plasma turbulence is now underway. Careful comparisons of the fully gyrokinetic simulations with simulations based on the computable models derived in this paper (RMHD-§ 2, isothermal electron fluid-
§ 4, KRMHD-§ 5, ERMHD-§ 7) as well as with the numerical studies based on various Landau fluid (Snyder et al. 1997;
Goswami et al. 2005; Ramos 2005; Sharma et al. 2006, 2007;
Passot & Sulem 2007) and gyrofluid (Snyder & Hammett
2001) closures appear to be the way forward in developing
a comprehensive numerical model of the turbulent cascade
from the outer scale to the electron gyroscale. The objective
is a quantitative characterization of the scaling-range properties (spectra, anisotropy, types of modes and interactions), the
ion and electron heating, and the transport properties of the

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
magnetized plasma turbulence.
Of the many astrophysical plasmas to which these results
apply, the solar wind, due to the high quality of turbulence
measurements possible in it, appears to be best suited for direct and detailed quantitative comparisons of the theory and
simulation results with observational evidence.
We thank S. Bale, T. Carter, S. Chapman, E. Churazov, T. Ensslin, A. Fabian, A. Finoguenov, A. Fletcher,
M. Haverkorn, T. Horbury, M. Markevitch, T. Passot,
F. Sahraoui, A. Shukurov, and A. Vikhlinin for helpful discussions of experimental and observational data; I. Abel,
M. Barnes, D. Ernst, J. Hastie, P. Ricci, C. Roach, and
B. Rogers for useful interactions concerning the gyrokinetic

37

collision operators. A.A.S. was supported by a PPARC Advanced Fellowship. He also thanks the US DOE Center for
Multiscale Plasma Dynamics for travel support and the UCLA
Plasma Group fot its hospitality on several occasions. S.C.C.
and W.D. thank the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics and
the Aspen Center for Physics for their hospitality. G.W.H.
was supported by the DOE contract DE-AC02-76CH03073.
G.G.H. was supported by the DOE Center for Multiscale
Plasma Dynamics, Fusion Science Center Cooperative Agreement ER54785. E.Q. was supported in part by the David and
Lucille Packard Foundation.

25

Using the GS2 code; see http://gs2.sourceforge.net.

APPENDIX

A. BRAGINSKII'S TWO-FLUID EQUATIONS AND REDUCED MHD

Here we explain how the standard one-fluid MHD equations used in § 2 and the collisional limit of the KRMHD system
(§ 6.1, derived in Appendix D) both emerge as limiting cases of the two-fluid theory. For the case of anisotropic fluctuations,
kk /k⊥ ≪ 1, all of this can, of course, be derived from gyrokinetics, but it is useful to provide a connection to the more well
known fluid description of collisional plasmas.
A.1. Two-Fluid Equations

The rigorous derivation of the fluid equations for a collisional plasma was done in the classic paper of Braginskii (1965). His
equations, valid for ω/νii ≪ 1, kk λmfpi ≪ 1, k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 (see Fig. 2), evolve the densities ns , mean velocities us and temperatures
Ts of each plasma species (s = i, e):


∂
∇ ns = −ns∇ * us ,
+ us *∇
(A1)
∂t




us × B
∂
∇ us = −∇
∇ ps − ∇ * Π̂ s + qs ns E +
+ Fs ,
(A2)
+ us *∇
ms n s
∂t
c


∂
3
∇ Ts = −ps∇ * us − ∇ * Γ̂ s − Π̂ s : ∇ us + Qs,
(A3)
ns
+ us *∇
2
∂t
where ps = ns Ts and the expressions for the viscous stress tensor Π̂ s , the friction force Fs , the heat flux Γ̂ s and the interspecies heat
exchange Qs are given in Braginskii (1965). Equations (A1-A3) are complemented with the quasineutrality condition, ne = Zni ,
and the Faraday and Ampère laws, which are (in the nonrelativistic limit)
∂B
c
∇ × E, j = ene (ui − ue ) =
∇ × B.
= −c∇
(A4)
∂t
4π
Because of quasineutrality, we only need one of the continuity equations, say the ion one. We can also use the electron momentum
equation [Eq. (A2), s = e] to express E, which we then substitute into the ion momentum equation and the Faraday law. The
resulting system is
dρ
∇ * u,
= −ρ∇
(A5)
dt




∇B Zme
∂
B2
B *∇
du
∇ p+
∇ ue ,
ρ
−
+ ue *∇
(A6)
− ∇ * Π̂ +
ρ = −∇
dt
8π
4π
mi
∂t
#
"


∇ pe c∇
∇ * Π̂ e cFe cme ∂
∂B
j × B c∇
∇ ue ,
(A7)
+
+
−
+
=∇ × u× B−
+ ue *∇
∂t
ene
ene
ene
ene
e
∂t
∇ . The ion and electron temperatures
where ρ = mi ni , u = ui , p = pi + pe , Π̂ = Π̂ i + Π̂ e , ue = u − j/ene, ne = Zni , d/dt = ∂/∂t + u *∇
continue to satisfy Eq. (A3).
A.2. Strongly Magnetized Limit

In this form, the two-fluid theory starts resembling the standard one-fluid MHD, which was our starting point in § 2: Eqs. (A5A7) already look similar to the continuity, momentum and induction equations. The additional terms that appear in these equations
and the temperature equations (A3) are brought under control by considering how they depend on a number of dimensionless
parameters that emerge: ω/νii , kk λmfpi , k⊥ ρi , (me /mi )1/2 . While all these are small in Braginskii's calculation, no assumption is
made as to how they compare to each other. We now specify that
r
kk λmfpi
me
ω
∼ √
≪1
(A8)
, k⊥ ρi ≪ kk λmfpi ∼
νii
mi
βi

38

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

(see Fig. 3). Note that the first of these relations is equivalent to assuming that the fluctuation frequencies are Alfvénic-the same
assumption as in gyrokinetics [Eq. (40)]. The second relation in Eq. (A8) will be referred to by us as the strongly magnetized
limit. Under the assumptions (A8), the two-fluid equations reduce to the following closed set:26
dρ
∇ * u,
= −ρ∇
dt






∇B
B2 1
B *∇
1
1
du
∇ p+
+ ρνki b̂b̂ : ∇ u − ∇ * u + ∇ * b̂b̂ρνki b̂b̂ : ∇ u − ∇ * u +
,
ρ = −∇
dt
8π 3
3
3
4π
dB
∇u − B∇
∇ * u,
= B *∇
dt

2

dTi
2
1
2
1
∇Ti − νie (Ti − Te ) + mi νki b̂b̂ : ∇ u − ∇ * u ,
= − Ti∇ * u + ∇ * b̂ρκki b̂ *∇
dt
3
ρ
3
3
 1
2
1
dTe
∇Te − νie (Te − Ti ) ,
= − Te∇ * u + ∇ * b̂ρκke b̂ *∇
dt
3
ρ
Z

(A10)
(A11)
(A12)
(A13)
(A14)

where νki = 0.90vthi λmfpi is the parallel ion viscosity, κki = 2.45vthi λmfpi parallel ion thermal diffusivity, κke = 1.40vthe λmfpe ∼

Z 2 /τ 5/2 (mi /me )1/2 κki parallel electron thermal diffusivity [here λmfpi = vthi /νii with νii defined in Eq. (44)], and νie ion-electron
collision rate [defined in Eq. (43)]. Note that the last term in Eq. (A13) represents the viscous heating of the ions.
A.3. One-Fluid Equations (MHD)
If we now restrict ourselves to the low-frequency regime where ion-electron collisions dominate over all other terms in the
ion-temperature equation (A13),
r
kk λmfpi mi
ω
∼ √
≪1
(A15)
νie
me
βi

[see Eqs. (A8) and (43)], we have, to lowest order in this new subsidiary expansion, Ti = Te = T . We can now write p = (ni + ne )T =
(1 + Z)ρT/mi and, adding Eqs. (A13) and (A14), find the equation for pressure:

2
 2
1
dp 5
∇ * u = ∇ * b̂ne κke b̂ *∇
∇T + mi νki b̂b̂ : ∇ u − ∇ * u ,
+ p∇
(A16)
dt 3
3
3

where we have neglected the ion thermal diffisivity compared to the electron one, but kept the ion heating term to maintain
energy conservation. Equation (A16) together with Eqs. (A10-A12) constitutes the conventional one-fluid MHD system. With
the dissipative terms [which are small because of Eq. (A15)] neglected, this was the starting point for our fluid derivation of
RMHD in § 2.
Note that the electrons in this regime are adiabatic because the electron thermal diffusion is small
p r mi
κke kk2
≪ 1,
(A17)
∼ kk λmfpi βi
ω
me

provided Eq. (A15) holds and βi is ordered to be order unity. If we take βi ≫ 1 instead, we can still satisfy Eq. (A15), so Ti = Te
follows from the ion temperature equation (A13) and the one-fluid equations emerge as an expansion in high βi . However, these
equations now describe two physical regimes:
the adiabatic long-wavelength
regime that satisfies Eq. (A17) and the shorter√
√
wavelength regime in which (me /mi )1/2 / βi ≪ kk λmfpi ≪ (me /mi )1/2 βi , so the fluid is isothermal, T = T0 = const, p = [(1 +
Z)T0 /mi ]ρ = c2s ρ [Eq. (7) holds with γ = 1].
A.4. Two-Fluid Equations with Isothermal Electrons

Let us now consider the regime in which the coupling between the ion and electron temperatures is small and the electron
diffusion is large [the limit opposite to Eqs. (A15) and (A17)]:
r
p r mi
κke kk2
kk λmfpi mi
ω
∼ √
≫ 1,
≫ 1,
(A18)
∼ kk λmfpi βi
νie
me
ω
me
βi

`
 ́
∇ * u/3 = p⊥ − pk , the difference between the perpenThe structure of the momentum equation (A11) is best understood by realizing that ρνki b̂b̂ : ∇ u −∇
dicular and parallel (ion) pressures. Since the total pressure is p = (2/3)p⊥ + (1/3)pk , Eq. (A11) can be written
„
«
ˆ `
 ́ ̃ B * ∇ B
B2
du
∇ p⊥ +
∇ * b̂b̂ p⊥ − pk +
= −∇
+∇
.
(A9)
ρ
dt
8π
4π
26

This is the general form of the momentum equation that is also valid for collisionless plasmas, when k⊥ ρi ≪ 1 but kk λmfpi is order unity or even large.
Equation (A9) together with the continuity equation (A11), the induction equation (A12) and a kinetic equation for the particle distribution function (from the
solution of which p⊥ and pk are determined) form the system known as Kinetic MHD (KMHD, see Kulsrud 1964, 1983). The collisional limit, kk λmfpi ≪ 1, of
KMHD is again Eqs. (A10-A14).

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

39

Then the electrons are isothermal, Te = T0e = const (with the usual assumption of stochastic field lines, so b̂ * ∇ Te = 0 implies
∇ Te = 0, as in § 4.4), while the ion temperature satisfies

2
 2
dTi
2
1
1
∇Ti + mi νki b̂b̂ : ∇ u − ∇ * u .
= − Ti∇ * u + ∇ * b̂ρκki b̂ *∇
(A19)
dt
3
ρ
3
3

Equation (A19) together with Eqs. (A10-A12) and p = ρ(Ti + ZT0e )/mi are a closed system that describes an MHD-like fluid
of adiabatic ions and isothermal electrons. Applying the ordering of § 2.1 to these equations and carrying out an expansion in
kk /k⊥ ≪ 1 entirely analogously to the way it was done in § 2, we arrive at the RMHD equations (13-14) for the Alfvén waves
and the following system for the passive fields (slow and entropy modes):


d δρ δBk
∇uk = 0,
+ b̂ *∇
(A20)
−
dt ρ0 B0


duk 2
δBk
1 d δρ
∇ b̂ *∇
∇
∇ uk +
,
(A21)
= νki b̂ *∇
− vA b̂ *∇
dt
B0
3 dt ρ0


δTi
d δTi 2 d δρ
∇ b̂ *∇
∇
,
(A22)
−
= κki b̂ *∇
dt T0i 3 dt ρ0
T0i
and the pressure balance





Z δρ
δTi 2 δBk
1
1 d δρ
∇ uk +
1+
.
=−
−
+
νki b̂ *∇
τ ρ0
T0i βi B0 3v2A
3 dt ρ0

(A23)

Recall that these equations, being the consequence of Braginskii's two-fluid equations (§ A.1), are an expansion in kk λmfpi ≪ 1
correct up to first order in this small parameter. Since the dissipative terms are small, we can replace (d/dt)δρ/ρ0 in the viscous
terms of Eqs. (A21) and (A23) by its value computed from Eqs. (A20), (A22) and (A23) in neglect of dissipation: (d/dt)δρ/ρ0 =
−b̂ * ∇ uk /(1 + c2s /v2A ) [cf. Eq. (20)], where the speed of sound cs is defined by Eq. (158). Substituting this into Eqs. (A21)
and (A23), we recover the collisional limit of KRMHD derived in Appendix D, see Eqs. (D21-D23) and (D25).
B. COLLISIONS IN GYROKINETICS

The general collision operator that appears in Eq. (32) is (Landau 1936)


 


X q2 q2′ ∂ Z
ww
∂ fs (v) 1
1
∂ fs′ (v′ )
1
∂ fs
s s
,
= 2π ln Λ
Î − 2 *
fs′ (v′ )
fs (v)
* d 3 v′
−
∂t c
ms ∂v
w
w
ms
∂v
ms ′
∂v′
′

(B1)

s

where w = v − v′ and ln Λ is the Coulomb logarithm. We now take into account the expansion of the distribution function (47),
use the fact that the collision operator vanishes when it acts on a Maxwellian, and retain only first-order terms in the gyrokinetic
expansion. This gives us the general form of the collision term in Eq. (50): it is the ring-averaged linearized form of the Landau
collision operator (B1), (∂hs/∂t)c = hCs [h]iRs , where



 ′

 

X q2 q2′ ∂ Z
v
v
1 ∂
1 ∂
ww
s s
′
′
3 ′1
Cs [h] = 2π ln Λ
hs (v) − F0s(v)
hs′ (v ) . (B2)
+
+
* d v
Î − 2 * F0s′ (v )
ms ∂v
w
w
T0s′ ms ∂v
T0s ms′ ∂v′
′
s

Note that the velocity derivatives are taken at constant r, i.e., the gyrocenter distribution functions that appear in the integrand
should be understood as hs (v) ≡ hs (t, r + v⊥ × ẑ/Ωs , v⊥ , vk ). The explicit form of the gyrokinetic collision operator can be derived
in k space as follows:
#+
 * "X

X
X




∂hs
ik*R
eik*Rs e−ik*ρρs (v)Cs eik*ρρ hk ,
(B3)
eik*rCs eik*ρρ hk Rs =
e hk
=
= Cs
∂t c
k
k
k
Rs

where ρ s (v) = v⊥ × ẑ/Ωs . Angle brackets with no subscript refer to averages over the gyroangle φ of quantities that do not
depend on spatial coordinates. Note that inside the operator Cs [. . . ], h occurs both with index s and velocity v and with index s′
and velocity v′ (over which summation/integration is done). In the latter case, ρ = ρ s′ (v′ ) = v′⊥ × ẑ/Ωs′ in the exponential factor
inside the operator.
Most of the properties of the collision operator that are used in the main body of this paper to order the collision terms
can be established in general, already on the basis of Eq. (B3) (§§ B.1-B.2). If the explicit form of the collision operator is
required, we could, in principle, perform the ring average on the linearized operator C [Eq. (B2)] and derive an explicit form of
(∂hs/∂t)c . In practice, in gyrokinetics, as in the rest of plasma physics, the full collision operator is only used when it is absolutely
unavoidable. In most problems of interest, further simplifications are possible: the same-species collisions are often modeled by
simpler operators that share the full collision operator's conservation properties (§ B.3), while the interspecies collision operators
are expanded in the electron-ion mass ratio (§ B.4).

40

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

B.1. Velocity-Space Integral of the Gyrokinetic Collision Operator
Many of our calculations involve integrating the gyrokinetic equation (50) over the velocity space while keeping r constant.
Here we estimate the size of the integral of the collision term when k⊥ ρs ≪ 1. Using Eq. (B3),

  XZ
Z


∂hs
d3v
=
d 3 v eik*r+ik*ρρs (v) e−ik*ρρs (v)Cs eik*ρρ hk
∂t c r
k
Z ∞
Z +∞
X


=
eik*r 2π
dv⊥ v⊥
dvk eik*ρρ s (v) e−ik*ρρs (v)Cs eik*ρρ hk
−∞

0

k

=

X

=

X

eik*r

Z

eik*r

Z

k

k

 X ik*r

e
d 3 v eik*ρρ s (v) e−ik*ρρ s (v)Cs eik*ρρ hk =
k

Z



d 3 v J0 (as ) e−ik*ρρs (v)Cs eik*ρρ hk

#


2
2


v
×
ẑ
k
v
1
1
v
×
ẑ
⊥
⊥
⊥
⊥
k*
−
−
+ . . . Cs eik*ρρ hk .
d 3 v 1 − ik *
Ωs
2
Ωs
4
Ωs
"

(B4)

Since the (linearized) collision operator Cs conserves particle number, the first term in the expansion vanishes. The operator
Cs = Css +Css′ is a sum of the same-species collision operator [the s′ = s part of the sum in Eq. (B2)] and the interspecies collision
operator (the s′ 6= s part). The former conserves total momentum of the particles of species s, so it gives no cotribution to the
second term in the expansion in Eq. (B4). Therefore,
Z
2 2
ρs δns .
(B5)
d 3 v hhCss [hs ]iRs ir ∼ νss k⊥
The interspecies collisions do contribute to the second term in Eq. (B4) due to momentum exchange with the species s′ . This
contribution is readily inferred from the standard formula for the linearized friction force (see, e.g., Helander & Sigmar 2002):
Z
Z
i
h
 ik*ρρ 
′
′
3
(B6)
ms d v vCss′ e hk = − d 3 v v ms νSss (v)eik*ρρs (v) hsk + ms′ νSs s (v)eik*ρρs′ (v) hs′ k ,
√







′
ms
v
v
v
2πn0s′ q2s q2s′ ln Λ  vths 3
1+
erf
−
,
(B7)
erf ′
νSss (v) =
1/2 3/2
v
ms ′
vths′
vths′
vths′
ms T0s
√ Rx
where erf (x) = (2/ π) 0 dy exp(−y2 ) is the error function. From this, via a calculation of ring averages analogous to Eq. (B16),
we get



Z
Z
E
E 
D
 ik*ρρ 
ms ′ Ωs ′ s ′ s D
v⊥ × ẑ
ρs (v)
ρs′ (v)
3
ss′
ik*ρ
ik*ρ
3
hsk +
hs′ k
Css′ e hk = d v νS (v) ik *ρρs (v) e
ν (v) ik *ρρs′ (v) e
d v −ik *
Ωs
ms Ωs S


Z
′
qs′ s′ s
= − d 3 v νSss (v)asJ1 (as )hsk +
(B8)
ν (v)as′ J1 (as′ )hs′ k
qs S
2 2
2 2
ρs δns + νs′ s k⊥
ρs′ δns′ .
∼ νss′ k⊥

2 2
For the ion-electron collisions (s = i, s′ = e), using Eqs. (41) and (43), we find that both terms are ∼ (me /mi )1/2 νii k⊥
ρi δni .
2 2
Thus, besides an extra factor of k⊥ ρi , the ion-electron collisions are also subdominant by one order in the mass-ratio expansion
compared to the ion-ion collisions. The same estimate holds for the interspecies contributions to the third and fourth terms in
2 2
Eq. (B4). In a similar fashion, the integral of the electron-ion collision operator (s = e, s′ = i), is ∼ νei k⊥
ρe δne , which is the same
order as the integral of the electron-electron collisions.
The conclusion of this section is that, both for ion and for electron collisions, the velocity-space integral (at constant r) of the
gyrokinetic collision operator is higher order than the collision operator itself by two orders of k⊥ ρs . This is the property that we
relied on in neglecting collision terms in Eqs. (96) and (129).

B.2. Ordering of Collision Terms in Eqs. (117) and (129)
In § 5, we claimed that the contribution to the ion-ion collision term due to the (ZehφiRi /T0i )F0i part of the ion distribution
function [Eq. (116)] was one order of k⊥ ρi smaller than the contributions from the rest of hi . This was used to order collision
terms in Eqs. (117) and (129). Indeed, from Eq. (B3),

 
X
 Zeφk

ZehφiRi
=
F0i
eik*Ri e−ik*ρρi Cii eik*ρρi J0 (ai )F0i
Cii
T0i
T0i
Ri
k
 


X
Zeφk
a2
1
2 2 Zeφ
∼ νii k⊥
ρi
F0i .
(B9)
=
eik*Ri e−ik*ρρi Cii 1 + ik *ρρi − (k *ρρi )2 − i + * * * F0i
2
4
T0i
T0i
k

This estimate holds because, as it is easy to ascertain using Eq. (B2), the operator Cii annihilates the first two terms in the
expansion and only acts nontrivially on an expression that is second order in k⊥ ρi . With the aid of Eq. (45), the desired ordering
of the term (B9) in Eq. (117) follows. When Eq. (B9) is integrated over velocity space, the result picks up two extra orders in k⊥ ρi
[a general effect of velocity-space integration; see Eq. (B4)], so the resulting term in Eq. (129) is third order, as stated in § 5.3.

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

41

B.3. Model Pitch-Angle-Scattering Operator for Same-Species Collisions
A popular model operator for same-species collisions that conserves particle number, momentum, and energy is constructed
by taking the test-particle pitch-angle-scattering operator and correcting it with an additional term that ensures momentum conservation (Rosenbluth et al. 1972; see also Helander & Sigmar 2002):
R 3

 


d v v νDss (v) hs
3
1 ∂
2v * U[hs]
1 ∂ 2 hs
ss
2 ∂hs
R
,
U[h
]
=
F
CM [hs ] = νD (v)
,
(B10)
+
1−ξ
+
s
0s
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ 1 − ξ 2 ∂φ2
2 d 3 v (v/vths )2 νDss (v)F0s(v)
v2ths
√


 v 3  1 v2   v  1 v
2πn0s q4s ln Λ
v
ths
ths
′
,
(B11)
νDss (v) = νss
1 − ths
erf
+
, νss =
erf
2
1/2 3/2
v
2 v
vths
2 v
vths
ms T
0s

where the velocity derivatives are at constant r. The gyrokinetic version of this operator is (cf. Catto & Tsang 1977;
Dimits & Cohen 1994)27


X
 ∂hsk v2 (1 + ξ 2) 2 2
v⊥ J1 (as )U⊥ [hsk ] + vk J0 (as )Uk [hsk ]
1 ∂
eik*Rs νDss (v)
hCM [hs ]iRs =
k
ρ
h
+
2
F
1 − ξ2
−
0s , (B12)
⊥ s sk
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ
4v2ths
v2ths
k
R
R
3 d 3 v v⊥ J1 (as ) νDss (v)hsk (v⊥ , vk )
3 d 3 v vk J0 (as ) νDss (v)hsk(v⊥ , vk )
R
R
U⊥ [hsk ] =
,
U
[h
]
=
,
k sk
2
2
d 3 v (v/vths )2 νDss (v)F0s (v)
d 3 v (v/vths )2 νDss (v)F0s (v)

where as = k⊥ v⊥ /Ωs . The velocity derivatives are now at constant Rs . The spatial diffusion term appearing in the ring-averaged
collision operator is physically due to the fact that a change in a particle's velocity resulting from a collision can lead to a change
in the spatial position of its gyrocenter.

 p
p
In order to derive Eq. (B12), we use Eq. (B3). Since, ρs (v) = x̂v 1 − ξ 2 sin φ − ŷv 1 − ξ 2 cosφ /Ωs , it is not hard to see that
"
#


∂ ik*ρρs (v)
∂
∂ ik*ρρs (v)
∂ ik⊥ * v⊥
ξ ik⊥ * v⊥ × ẑ
ρs (v)
ρ(v)
ik*ρ
ik*ρ
h
,
hsk .
(B13)
e
hsk = e
−
e
h
=
e
+
sk
sk
∂ξ
∂ξ 1 − ξ 2
Ωs
∂φ
∂φ
Ωs
Therefore,



 ∂hsk v2 ξ 2 2
∂
ρs (v)
ρ s (v) ∂
2 ∂ ik*ρ
−ik*ρ
1−ξ
1 − ξ2
k hsk ,
e
hsk =
−
e
∂ξ
∂ξ
∂ξ
∂ξ
2Ω2s ⊥




2
v2 1 − ξ 2 2
ρ s (v) ∂
ρ s (v)
−ik*ρ
ik*ρ
e
e
hsk = −
k⊥ hsk .
∂φ2
2Ω2s
(B14)
Combining these formulae, we obtain the first two terms in Eq. (B12). Now let us work out the U term:
 D

Z ∞
Z +∞
Z
E
E
D


′
ρs (v)
ρs (v)
ρ s (v′ )
′ ′
−ik*ρ
−ik*ρ
3 ′ ′ ss ′ ik*ρ
′
′
* 2π
dv⊥ v⊥
dv′k νDss (v′ ) v′ eik*ρρs (v ) hsk v′⊥ , v′k .
e
v * d v v νD (v )e
hsk v⊥ , vk = v e
0

−∞

(B15)
Since v e±ik*ρρs (v) = ẑvk e±ik*ρρs (v) + v⊥ e±ik*ρρs (v) , where e±ik*ρρ s (v) = J0 (as ) and







∂
v⊥ × ẑ
ẑ × k⊥
v⊥ × ẑ
ρ s (v)
±ik*ρ
= ∓iΩs ẑ ×
exp ±ik⊥ *
= ±i
v⊥ J1 (as ), (B16)
= ẑ × v⊥ × ẑ exp ±ik⊥ *
v⊥ e
Ωs
∂k⊥
Ωs
k⊥

we obtain the third term in Eq. (B12).
It is useful to give the lowest-order form of the operator (B12) in the limit k⊥ ρs ≪ 1:
"
#
R
3vk d 3 v′ v′k νDss (v′ )hs(v′⊥ , v′k )

1 ∂
ss
2 2
2 ∂hs
R
hCM [hs ]iRs = νD (v)
ρs ).
F0s + O(k⊥
1−ξ
+
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ
d 3 v′ v′2 νDss (v′ )F0s (v′ )

(B17)

This is the operator that can be used in the right-hand side of Eq. (137) (as, e.g., is done in the calculation of collisional transport
terms in Appendix D.3).
In practical numerical computations of gyrokinetic turbulence, the pitch-angle scattering operator is not sufficient because the
distribution function develops small scales not only in ξ but also in v (M. A. Barnes and W. Dorland 2006, unpublished). This
is, indeed, expected because the phase-space entropy cascade produces small scales in v⊥ , rather than just in ξ (see § 7.4.1). In
order to provide a cut off in v, an energy-diffusion operator must be added to the pitch-angle-scattering operator derived above.
A tractable model gyrokinetic energy-diffusion operator was proposed by Abel et al. (2007) on the basis of the approximate
collision operator of Hirshman & Sigmar (1976).
B.4. Electron-Ion Collision Operator

This operator can be expanded in me /mi and to the lowest order is (see, e.g., Helander & Sigmar 2002)


 
 v 3
 ∂he
2v * ui
1 ∂ 2 he
1 ∂
the
νDei (v) = νei
F
+
1 − ξ2
.
+
Cei [h] = νDei (v)
0e ,
2
2
2
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ 1 − ξ ∂φ
v
vthe

27

(B18)

This is the collision operator that is implemented in the current version of the publicaly available GS2 code (W. Dorland and T. Tatsuno 2006, unpublished).

42

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

The corrections to this form are O(me /mi ). This is second order in the expansion of § 4 and, therefore, we need not keep these
corrections. The operator (B18) is mathematically similar to the model operator for the same-species collisions [Eq. (B12)]. The
gyrokinetic version of this operator is derived in the way analogous to the calculation in Appendix B.3. The result is

X
 ∂hek v2 (1 + ξ 2) 2 2
1 ∂
1 − ξ2
−
hCei [h]iRe =
k⊥ ρe hek
eik*Re νDei (v)
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ
4v2the
k

Z
′2
′
2vk J0 (ae )ukki
Zme v2⊥ J1 (ae )
2 2 1
3 ′ 2v⊥ J1 (ai )
F
k
ρ
h
+
−
.
(B19)
d
v
F
0e
ik
0e
⊥ i
mi v2the ae
n0i
v2thi a′i
v2the
The second and third terms are manifestly second order in (me /mi )1/2 , so have to be neglected along with other O(me /mi )
contributions to the electron-ion collisions. The remaining two terms are first order in the mass-ratio expansion: the first term
vanishes for he = h(0)
e [Eq. (93)], so its contribution is first order; in the fourth term, we can use Eq. (80) to express uki in terms of
quantities that are also first order. Keeping only the first-order terms, the gyrokinetic electron-ion collision operator is

 

 (1) 2vk
1 ∂
c
ei
2
2 ∂he
(B20)
hCei [h]iRe = νD (v)
∇ Ak F0e .
1−ξ
+ 2
uke −
2 ∂ξ
∂ξ
4πen0e ⊥
vthe
C. A NON-GYROKINETIC DERIVATION OF THE ELECTRON EQUATIONS

Here we first show how the evolution equations (108-109) of § 4 can be derived from electron-fluid dynamics, without the
use of gyrokinetics (§ C.1). We then discuss the physical assumptions that allow these equations to be reduced to the EMHD
equations (199-200) of § 7 (§ C.2).
C.1. Derivation of Eqs. (108-109)

We start with the following three equations:
∂B
∇ × E,
= −c∇
∂t
∂ne
+ ∇ * (ne ue ) = 0,
∂t
ue × B
∇ pe
E+
.
=−
c
ene

(C1)
(C2)
(C3)

Equation (C1) is Faraday's law, Eq. (C2) is the electron continuity equation, and Eq. (C3) is the generalized Ohm's law, which
is the electron momentum equation with all electron inertia terms neglected (i.e., effectively, the lowest order in the expansion
in the electron mass me ). The electron-pressure term in the right-hand of Eq. (C3) is sometimes called the thermoelectric term.
We now assume the same static uniform equilibrium, E0 = 0, B0 = B0 ẑ, that we have used throughout this paper and apply to
Eqs. (C1-C3) the fundamental ordering discussed in § 3.1.
First consider the projection of Ohm's law (C3) onto the total magnetic field B, use the definition of E [Eq. (33)], and keep the
leading-order terms in the ǫ expansion:
E * b̂ = −

1
∇ pe
b̂ *∇
ene

⇒

δ pe
1 ∂Ak
∇φ = b̂ *∇
∇
.
+ b̂ *∇
c ∂t
en0e

(C4)

This turns into Eq. (108) if we also assume isothermal electrons, δ pe = T0e δne [see Eq. (95)].
With the aid of Eq. (C3), Faraday's law (C1) turns into
∂B
∇B + B *∇
∇ue − B∇
∇ * ue .
= ∇ × (ue × B) = −ue *∇
∂t
Keeping the leading-order terms, we find, for the components of Eq. (C5) perpendicular and parallel to the guide field,


δB⊥
∂
∇u⊥e ,
∇
= b̂ *∇
+ u⊥e *∇ ⊥
∂t
B0



δBk δne
∂
∇uke .
∇
= b̂ *∇
−
+ u⊥e *∇ ⊥
∂t
B0 n0e
In the last equation, where we have used the electron continuity equation (C2) to write


δne
∂
∇⊥
.
+ u⊥e *∇
∇ * ue = −
∂t
n0e
From Ohm's law (C3), we have, to lowest order,




δ pe
c
δ pe
c
E⊥ + ∇ ⊥
= ẑ × ∇ ⊥
φ−
.
u⊥e = −ẑ ×
B0
en0e
B0
en0e

(C5)

(C6)
(C7)

(C8)

(C9)

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

43

Using this expression in Eq. (C7) gives






d δBk δne
c
c δ pe δne
δ pe δBk
∇uke =
− b̂ *∇
−
,
(C10)
−
,
,
dt B0 n0e
B0 en0e B0
B0 en0e n0e
where d/dt is defined in the usual way [Eq. (114)]. Assuming isothermal electrons, δ pe = T0e δne , annihilates the second term
on the right-hand side and turns the above equation into Eq. (109). As for Eq. (C6), the use of Eq. (C9) and substitution of
δB⊥ = −ẑ × ∇ ⊥ Ak turns it into the previously derived Eq. (C4), whence follows Eq. (108).
Thus, we have shown that Eqs. (108-109) can be derived as a direct consequence of Faraday's law, electron-fluid dynamics
(electron continuity equation and the electron force balance, a. k. a. the generalized Ohm's law), and the assumption of isothermal
electrons-all taken to the leading order in the gyrokinetic ordering given in § 3.1 (i.e., assuming strongly interacting anisotropic
fluctuations with kk ≪ k⊥ ).
We have just proved that Eqs. (108) and (109) are simply the perpendicular and parallel part, respectively, of Eq. (C5). The
latter equation means that the magnetic-field lines are frozen into the electron flow velocity ue , i.e., the flux is conserved, the
result formally proven in § 4.3 [see Eq. (91)].
C.2. Electron MHD and the Derivation of Eqs. (199-200)
The standard approach to deriving the Electron MHD approximation is to start with Eq. (C5), which expresses the assumption
that the magnetic field is frozen into the electron flow. The electron velocity can be written in terms of the ion velocity and the
current density:
c
j
= ui −
∇ × B,
(C11)
ue = ui −
ene
4πene
where Ampère's law has been used.28 It is then assumed that, at scales much smaller than the ion gyroscale (k⊥ ρi ≫ 1), the
ions can be considered immobile, ui = 0. Substituting the remainder of Eq. (C11) into Eq. (C5) and assuming ne = n0e = const
gives Eq. (201), the equation of Electron MHD. Let us see what happens if such an approach is applied in combination with the
ǫ expansion. To the leading order in ǫ, Eq. (C11) gives
c
u⊥e = u⊥i +
ẑ × ∇ ⊥ δBk ,
(C12)
4πen0e
c
∇ 2 Ak .
(C13)
uke = uki +
4πen0e ⊥
The perpendicular and parallel parts of Eq. (C5) to the leading order in ǫ are Eqs. (C6) and (C7), respectively. Using Eqs. (C12C13) and taking uki = 0, u⊥i = 0, we get

δBk
∂Ak
cB20
∇
,
=−
b̂ *∇
∂t
4πen0e
B0




δBk δne
∂ δBk δne
c
cB0
∇∇ 2⊥ Ak +
=
.
−
,
b̂ *∇
∂t B0 n0e
4πen0e
4πen0e B0 n0e
If we further assume incompressibility, δne = 0, use n0e = Zn0i , and define formally [cf. Eqs. (127) and (197)]

−1
δBk
Ak
Z
1
1+
ρi v A
,
Ψ = −√
, Φ= √
τ
B0
βi
4πmi n0i
Eqs. (C14-C15) become

∂Ψ
∇Φ,
= vA 1 + Z/τ b̂ *∇
∂t

vA
∂Φ
 b̂ *∇
∇ ρ2i ∇2⊥ Ψ .
=−
∂t
βi 1 + Z/τ

(C14)
(C15)

(C16)

(C17)
(C18)

These are the same as Eqs. (199-200) of § 7 in the limit of βi ≫ 1. As we have assumed the density perturbation to be zero, it is
not surprising that we have recovered what is effectively the incompressible limit of the correct equations. In order Eqs. (199-200)
to be reproduced fully in this derivation, we must keep the terms containing δne in Eq. (C15) and find a way to relate δne to δBk .
This can be done by adopting the pressure balance, which is a fundamental feature of the gyrokinetic approximation [cf. Eq. (60)]
and assuming both ions and electrons to be isothermal [cf. Eq. (95) and Eq. (47) for ions with hi omitted]:


δBk
B0 δBk
βi
Z δne
=−
,
(C19)
= −δ pi − δ pe = −T0i δni − T0e δne ⇒
1+
4π
B0
2
τ n0e
which is consistent with Eqs. (196) and (197). Using Eq. (C19) and the definitions (C16) in Eq. (C15), we recover the desired
Eq. (200) [Eq. (C17) is already the same as Eq. (199)]. It should be clear from this derivation that the ERMHD equations (199200) are the appropriate generalization of the standard EMHD equation (201) to the case of arbitrary βi under the assumption of
the gyrokinetic ordering (§ 3.1). As we have seen, when βi is not large, the ion motion must be taken into account to the extent
that it affects the plasma density: namely, when substituting the expression (C11) for ue into Eq. (C5), we may assume ui = 0 in
all terms except ∇ * ue , which is calculated from the electron continuity equation [see Eq. (C8)].
28

Note that if Eq. (C11) is substituted into the generalized Ohm's law (C3), the second term gives rise to what is known as the Hall term [cf. Eq. (A7)].

44

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.
D. FLUID LIMIT OF THE KINETIC RMHD

Taking the fluid (collisional) limit of the KRMHD system (summarized in § 5.7) means carrying out another subsidiary
expansion-this time in kk λmfpi ≪ 1. The expansion only affects the equations for the density and magnetic-field-strength
fluctuations (§ 5.5) because the Alfvén waves are indifferent to collisional effects.
The calculation presented below follows the Enskog procedure-a standard perturbation algorithm used in the kinetic theory
of gases and in plasma physics to derive fluid equations with collisional transport coefficients (Chapman & Cowling 1970). For
magnetized plasma, this calculation was carried out in full generality by Braginskii (1965), whose starting point was the full
plasma kinetic theory [Eqs. (32-35)]. While what we do below is, strictly speaking, merely a particular case of his calculation, it
has the advantage of relative simplicity and also serves to show how the fluid limit is recovered from the gyrokinetic formalism-a
demonstration that we believe to be of value.
It is convenient to rewrite the KRMHD system [Eqs. (149-151)] in terms of the function δ f ̃i = g + (v2⊥/v2thi )(δBk /B0 )F0i , which
is the perturbation of the local Maxwellian in the frame of the Alfvén waves (see § 5.4). We have
It will be convenient to use KRMHD system written in terms of the function δ f ̃i = g + (v2⊥ /v2thi )(δBk /B0 )F0i , which is the
perturbation of the local Maxwellian in the frame of the Alfvén waves [Eqs. (142-144)]. We want to expand Eq. (142) in powers
(1)
of kk λmfpi , so we let δ f ̃i = δ f ̃i(0) + δ f ̃i(1) + . . . , δBk = δB(0)
k + δBk + . . . , etc.
D.1. Zeroth Order: Ideal Fluid Equations

Since [see Eq. (40)]
kk vk
kk vA
kk λmfpi
kk vthi
ω
,
∼
∼ √
∼
∼ kk λmfpi ,
(D1)
νii
νii
νii
νii
βi
iE
D h
= 0. The zero mode of the collision operator is a Maxwellian. Therefore, we
to zeroth order Eq. (142) becomes Cii δ f ̃i(0)
Ri

may write the full ion distribution function up to zeroth order in kk λmfpi as follows [see Eq. (136)]
)
(
mi [(v⊥ − uE )2 + (vk − uk )2 ]
ni
fi =
,
3/2 exp −
2Ti
2πTi /mi

(D2)

where ni = n0i + δni and Ti = T0i + δTi include both the unperturbed quatities and their perturbations. The E × B drift velocity uE
comes from the Alfvén waves (see § 5.4) and does not concern us here. Since the perturbations δni , uk and δTi are small in the
original gyrokinetic expansion, Eq. (D2) is equivalent to
#
"
 2

v
3 δTi(0) 2vk (0)
δn(0)
(0)
e
 ̃
+ 2 −
+ 2 uk F0i ,
(D3)
δ fi =
n0e
T0i
vthi 2
vthi
where we have used quasineutrality to replace δni /n0i = δne /n0e . This automatically satisfies Eq. (143), while Eq. (144) gives us
an expression for the ion-temperature perturbation:


(0)
δTi(0)
Z δn(0)
2 δBk
e
= − 1+
−
.
T0i
τ
n0e βi B0

(D4)

Note that this is consistent with the interpretation of the perpendicular Ampère's law [Eq. (56), which is the progenitor of
Eq. (144)] as the pressure balance [see Eq. (60)]: indeed, recalling that the electron pressure perturbation is δ pe = T0e δne [Eq. (95)],
we have
δ

B2 B20 δBk
= −δ pe − δ pi = −δne T0e − δni T0i − n0i δTi ,
=
8π 4π B0

(D5)

whence follows Eq. (D4) by way of quasineutrality (Zni = ne ) and the definitions of Z, τ , βi [Eqs. (36-38)].
Since the collision operator conserves particle number, momentum and energy, we can obtain evolution equations for δn(0)
e /n0e ,
(0)
(0)
2 2
uk and δBk /B0 by multiplying Eq. (142) by 1, vk , v /vthi , respectively, and integrating over the velocity space. The three
moments that emerge this way are
Z
δn(0)
1
(D6)
d 3 v δ f ̃i(0) = e ,
n0i
n0e
Z
1
(D7)
d 3 v vk δ f ̃i(0) = u(0)
k ,
n0i
!
Z
δT (0)
3 δn(0)
1
v2
e
.
(D8)
+ i
d 3 v 2 δ f ̃i(0) =
n0i
2 n0e
T0i
vthi

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS

45

The three evolution equations for these moments are
d
dt
du(0)
k

δB(0)
δn(0)
k
e
−
n0e
B0
∇
− v2A b̂ *∇

dt
"
d 3
dt 2

!

δB(0)
k
B0

∇u(0)
+ b̂ *∇
k = 0,
= 0,
!

δn(0)
δT (0)
e
+ i
n0e
T0i

−

(D9)

(D10)
(0) #

5 δBk
2 B0

5
∇u(0)
+ b̂ *∇
k = 0.
2

(D11)

These allow us to recover the fluid equations we derived in § 2.3: Eq. (D10) is the parallel component of the MHD momentum
equation (22); combining Eqs. (D9), (D11) and (D4), we obtain the continuity equation and the parallel component of the
induction equation-these are the same as Eqs. (20) and (21):
1
d δn(0)
e
∇u(0)
=−
b̂ *∇
k ,
dt n0e
1 + c2s /v2A

(D12)

(0)
1
d δBk
∇u(0)
=
b̂ *∇
k ,
dt B0
1 + v2A /c2s

(D13)

where the sound speed cs is defined by Eq. (158). From Eqs. (D9) and (D11), we also find the analog of the entropy equation (18):


(0) !
δn(0)
d δs(0)
δs(0) δTi(0) 2 δn(0)
v2A δBk
d δTi(0) 2 d δn(0)
5 Z
e
e
e
.
(D14)
=
⇔
= 0,
=
−
=−
+
+
dt T0i
3 dt n0e
dt s0
s0
T0i
3 n0e
3 τ
n0e c2s B0
This implies that the temperature changes due to compressional heating only.
D.2. Generalized Energy: Five RMHD Cascades Recovered

We now calculate the generalized energy by substituting δ f ̃i from Eq. (D3) into Eq. (145) and using Eqs. (D4) and (D14):
#
"

Z
2
2 
3
v2A
3
1 + Z/τ δs2
1 + Z/τ
mi n0i u2E δB2⊥ mi n0i uk δBk
3
= W⊥+ + W⊥− + Wk+ + Wk− + n0i T0i
1 + 2 + n0i T0i
W= d r
+
+
+
Ws .
2
2
8π
2
8π
cs
4
5/3 + Z/τ s0
2
5/3 + Z/τ
(D15)
The first two terms are the Alfvén-wave energy [Eq. (146)]. The following two terms are the slow-wave energy, which splits into
the independently cascaded energies of "+" and "−" waves (see § 2.4):
Z

mi n0i  + 2
(D16)
|zk | + |z−k |2 .
WSW = Wk+ + Wk− = d 3 r
2
The last term is the total variance of the entropy mode. Thus, we have recovered the five cascades of the RMHD system (§ 2.5).
D.3. First Order: Collisional Transport

Now let us compute the collisional transport terms for the equations derived above. In order to do this, we have to determine
the first-order perturbed distribution function δ f ̃i(1) , which satisfies [see Eq. (142)]


(0) !
iE
D h
(0)
d
v2⊥ δBk
(1)
(0)
(0) Z δne
 ̃
 ̃
 ̃
∇ δ fi +
=
Cii δ fi
(D17)
δ fi − 2
+ vk b̂ *∇
F0i .
dt
τ n0e
Ri
vthi B0

We now use Eq. (D3) to substitute for δ f ̃i(0) and Eqs. (D12-D14) and (D10) to compute the time derivatives. Equation (D17)
becomes
"
#
 2

(0)
iE
D h
 v2 2/3 + c2s /v2A
5
v
δT
(1)
(0)
2
i
∇uk + ξv 2 −
∇
= − 1 − 3ξ
Cii δ f ̃i
b̂ *∇
F0i (v),
(D18)
b̂ *∇
T0i
Ri
v2thi 1 + c2s /v2A
vthi 2

where ξ = vk /v. Note that the right-hand side gives zero when multiplied by 1, vk or v2 and integrated over the velocity space, as
it must do because the collision operator in the left-hand side conserves particle number, momentum and energy.
Solving Eq. (D18) requires inverting the collision operator. While this can be done for the general Landau collision operator
(see Braginskii 1965), for our purposes, it is sufficient to use the model operator given in Appendix B.3, Eq. (B17). This simplifies
calculations at the expense of an order-one inaccuracy in the numerical values of the transport coefficients. As the exact value of
these coefficients will never be crucial for us, this is an acceptable loss of precision. Inverting the collision operator in Eq. (D18)
then gives
#
"

 2
(0)
2 2
2 2
v
δT
5
1
−
3ξ
2/3
+
c
/v
v
1
(0)
(1)
s A
∇ i
∇uk − ξv 2 −
b̂ *∇
F0i (v),
(D19)
b̂ *∇
δ f ̃i = ii
3 v2thi 1 + c2s /v2A
T0i
νD (v)
vthi 2

46

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

where νDii (v) is a collision frequency defined
in Eq. (B11)
R
R and we have chosen
R the constants of integration in such a way that the
three conservation laws are respected: d 3 v δ f ̃i(1) = 0, d 3 v vk δ f ̃i(1) = 0, d 3 v v2 δ f ̃i(1) = 0. These relations mean that δn(1)
e = 0,
(1)
=
0
and
that,
in
view
of
Eq.
(144),
we
have
u(1)
=
0,
δT
i
k
δB(1)
k
B0

=−

1 2/3 + c2s /v2A
∇ uk ,
νki b̂ *∇
3v2A 1 + c2s /v2A

(D20)

where νki is defined below [Eq. (D24)]. Equations (D19-D20) are now used to calculate the first-order corrections to the moment
equations (D9-D11). They become


d δne δBk
∇uk = 0,
+ b̂ *∇
(D21)
−
dt n0e B0

duk 2
δBk 2/3 + c2s /v2A
∇ b̂ *∇
∇ uk ,
∇
νki b̂ *∇
(D22)
=
− vAb̂ *∇
dt
B0
1 + c2s /v2A


d δTi 2 d δne
δTi
∇ b̂ *∇
∇
,
(D23)
−
= κki b̂ *∇
dt T0i 3 dt n0e
T0i
where we have introduced the coefficients of parallel viscosity and parallel thermal diffusivity:
 2

Z
Z
2 1
v
5
2 1
v4
v4
3
3
F0i (v),
κki =
−
νki =
F0i (v).
d v ii
d v ii
15 n0i
9 n0i
νD (v)v2thi
νD (v)v2thi v2thi 2

(D24)

All perturbed quantities are now accurate up to first order in kk λmfpi . Note that in Eq. (D22), we used Eq. (D20) to express
(1)
δB(0)
k = δBk − δBk . We do the same in Eq. (D4) and obtain




Z δne
δTi 2 δBk
1 2/3 + c2s /v2A
∇
ν
b̂
*∇
u
.
(D25)
1+
=−
−
+ 2
ki
k
τ n0e
T0i βi B0 3vA 1 + c2s /v2A
This equation completes the system (D21-D23), which allows us to determine δne , uk , δTi and δBk . In § 6.1, we use the equations
derived above, but absorb the prefactor (2/3 + c2s /v2A )/(1 + c2s /v2A ) into the definition of νki . The same system of equations can also
be derived from Braginskii's two-fluid theory (Appendix A.4), from which we can borrow the quantitatively correct values of the
viscosity and ion thermal diffusivity: νki = 0.90v2thi /νii , κki = 2.45v2thi /νii , where νii is defined in Eq. (44).
REFERENCES
Abel, I. G., Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W. & Tatsuno, T.
2007, Phys. Plasmas, submitted
Antonsen, T. M. & Lane, B. 1980, Phys. Fluids, 23, 1205
Armstrong, J. W., Coles, W. A., Kojima, M., & Rickett, B. J. 1990, ApJ, 358,
685
Armstrong, J. W., Rickett, B. J., & Spangler, S. R. 1995, ApJ, 443, 209
Balbus, S. A. & Hawley, J. F. 1998, Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 1
Bale, S. D., Kellogg, P. J., Mozer, F. S., Horbury, T. S., & Reme, H. 2005,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 94, 215002
Barnes, A. 1966, Phys. Fluids, 9, 1483
Bavassano, B., Dobrowolny, M., Fanfoni, G., Mariani, F., & Ness, N. F. 1982,
J. Geophys. Res., 87, 3617
Bavassano, B., Pietropaolo, E., & Bruno, R. 2004, Ann. Geophys., 22, 689
Beck, R. 2006, in Polarisation 2005, ed. F. Boulanger & M. A. MivilleDeschenes, EAS Pub. Ser., in press (astro-ph/0603531)
Belcher, J. W. & Davis, L. 1971, J. Geophys. Res., 76, 3534
Beresnyak, A. & Lazarian, A. 2006, ApJ, 640, L175
Bershadskii, A. & Sreenivasan, K. R. 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett., 93, 064501
Bhattacharjee, A. & Ng, C. S. 2001, ApJ, 548, 318
Bhattacharjee, A., Ng, C. S., Spangler, S. R. 1998, ApJ, 494, 409
Bieber, J. W., Wanner, W., & Matthaeus, W. H. 1996, J. Geophys. Res., 101,
2511
Bigazzi, A., Biferale, L., Gama, S. M. A., & Velli, M. 2006, ApJ, 638, 499
Biskamp, D., Schwartz, E., & Drake, J. F. 1996, Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 1264
Biskamp, D., Schwartz, E., Zeiler, A., Celani, A., & Drake, J. F. 1999, Phys.
Plasmas, 6, 751
Boldyrev, S. A. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 115002
Braginskii, S. I. 1965, Rev. Plasma Phys., 1, 205
Brizard, A. J. & Hahm, T. S. 2007, Rev. Mod. Phys., in press [PPPL Report
4153]
Brunetti, G. & Lazarian, A. 2007, MNRAS, in press (astro-ph/0703591)
Bruno, R. & Carbone, V. 2005, Living Rev. Solar Phys., 2, 4
Candy, J. & Waltz, R. E. 2003, J. Comp. Phys., 186, 545
Catto, P. J. 1978, Plasma Phys., 20, 719
Catto, P. J. & Tsang, K. T. 1977, Phys. Fluids, 20, 396

Catto, P. J., Tang, W. M., & Baldwin, D. E. 1981, Plasma Phys., 23, 639
Celnikier, L. M., Harvey, C. C., Jegou, R., Kemp, M., & Moricet, P. 1983,
A&A, 126, 293
Celnikier, L. M., Muschietti, L., & Goldman, M. V. 1987, A&A, 181, 138
Chandran, B. D. G. 2005a, ApJ, 632, 809
Chandran, B. D. G. 2005b, Phys. Rev. Lett., 95, 265004
Chapman, S. & Cowling, T. G. 1970, The Mathematical Theory of NonUniform Gases (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press)
Chen, Y. & Parker, S. E. 2003, J. Comp. Phys., 189, 463
Cho, J. & Lazarian, A. 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 245001
Cho, J. & Lazarian, A. 2003, MNRAS, 345, 325
Cho, J. & Lazarian, A. 2004, ApJ, 615, L41
Cho, J. & Vishniac, E. T. 2000, ApJ, 539, 273
Cho, J., Lazarian, A., & Vishniac, E. T. 2002, ApJ, 564, 291
Cho, J., Lazarian, A., & Vishniac, E. T. 2002, ApJ, 595, 812
Clarke, T. E. & Ensslin T. A. 2006, AJ, 131, 2900
Coleman, P. J. 1968, ApJ, 153, 371
Coles, W. A. & Harmon, J. K. 1989, ApJ, 337, 1023
Coles, W. A., Liu, W., Harmon, J. K., & Martin, C. L. 1991, J. Geophys. Res.,
96, 1745
Corrsin, S. 1951, J. Applied Phys., 22, 469
Cowley, S. C. 1985, Ph. D. Thesis (Princeton University)
Cranmer, S. R. & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2003, ApJ, 594, 573
Dasso, S., Milano, L. J., Matthaeus, W. H., & Smith, C. W. 2005, ApJ, 635,
L181
Dennett-Thorpe, J. & de Bruyn, A. G. 2003, A&A, 404, 113
Dimits, A. M. & Cohen, B. I. 1994, Phys. Rev. E, 49, 709
Dmitruk, P., Gomez, D. O., & Matthaeus, W. H. 2003, Phys. Plasmas, 10,
3584
Dubin, D. H. E., Krommes, J. A., Oberman, C., & Lee, W. W. 1983, Phys.
Fluids, 26, 3524
Elsasser, W. M. 1950, Phys. Rev., 79, 183
Ensslin, T. A. & Vogt, C. 2006, A&A, 453, 447
Ensslin, T. A., Waelkens, A., Vogt, C., & Schekochihin, A. A. 2006, Astron.
Nachr., 327, 626

KINETIC TURBULENCE IN MAGNETIZED PLASMAS
Fabian, A. C., Sanders, J. S., Taylor, G. B., Allen, S. W., Crawford, C. S.,
Johnstone, R. M., & Iwasawa, K. 2006, MNRAS, 366, 417
Ferriere, K. M. 2001, Rev. Mod. Phys., 73, 1031
Foote, E. A. & Kulsrud, R. M. 1979, ApJ, 233, 302
Fried, B. D. & Conte, S. D. 1961, The Plasma Dispersion Function (San
Diego: Academic Press)
Frieman, E. A. & Chen, L. 1982, Phys. Fluids, 25, 502
Galtier, S. 2006, J. Plasma Phys., 72, 721
Galtier, S. & Bhattacharjee, A. 2003, Phys. Plasmas, 10, 3065
Glatier, S. & Buchlin, E. 2007, ApJ, 656, 560
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Newell, A. C., & Pouquet, A. 2000, J. Plasma
Phys., 63, 447
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Newell, A. C., & Pouquet, A. 2002, ApJ, 564,
L49
Gary, S. P., Montgomery, M. D., Feldman, W. C., & Forslund, D. W. 1976,
J. Geophys. Res., 81, 1241
Gary, S. P., Skoug, R. M., Steinberg, J. T., & Smith, C. W. 2001, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 28, 2759
Goldreich, P. & Reisenegger, A. 1992, ApJ, 395, 250
Goldreich, P. & Sridhar, S. 1995, ApJ, 438, 763
Goldreich, P. & Sridhar, S. 1997, ApJ, 485, 680
Goswami, P., Passot, T., & Sulem, P. L. 2005, Phys. Plasmas, 12, 102109
Grall, R. R., Coles, W. A., Spangler, S. R., Sakurai, T., & Harmon, J. K. 1997,
J. Geophys. Res., 102, 263
Grison, B., Sahraoui, F., Lavraud, B., Chust, T., Cornilleau-Wehrlin, N.,
Rème, H., Balogh, A., & André, M. 2005, Ann. Geophys., 23, 3699
Hahm, T. S., Lee, W. W., & Brizard, A. 1988, Phys. Fluids, 31, 1940
Haugen, N. E. L., Brandenburg, A., & Dobler, W. 2004, Phys. Rev. E, 70,
016308
Haverkorn, M., Gaensler, B. M., McClure-Griffiths, N. M., Dickey, J. M., &
Green, A. J. 2004, ApJ, 609, 776
Haverkorn, M., Gaensler, B. M., Brown, J. C., Bizunok, N. S., McClureGriffiths, N. M., Dickey, J. M., & Green, A. J. 2005, ApJ, 637, L33
Helander, P. & Sigmar, D. J. 2002, Collisional Transport in Magnetized
Plasmas (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press)
Hazeltine, R. D. 1983, Phys. Fluids, 26, 3242
Hellinger, P., Trávnícek, P., Kasper, J. C., & Lazarus, A. J., 2006, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 33, L09101
Higdon, J. C. 1984, ApJ, 285, 109
Hirshman, S. P. & Sigmar, D. J. 1976, Phys. Fluids, 19, 1532
Hnat, B., Chapman, S. C., & Rowlands, G. 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett., 94, 204502
Horbury, T. S., Balogh, A., Forsyth, R. J., & Smith E. J. 1996, A&A, 316,
333
Horbury, T. S., Forman, M. A., & Oughton, S. 2005, Plasma Phys. Control.
Fusion, 47, B703
Horbury, T. S., Forman, M. A., & Oughton, S. 2007, in preparation
Howes, G. G., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E., &
Schekochihin, A. A. 2006, ApJ, 651, 590
Howes, G. G., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E., &
Schekochihin, A. A. 2007, J. Geophys. Res., submitted
Iskakov, A. B., Cowley, S. C., & Schekochihin, A. A.. 2007, ApJ, in
preparation
Iroshnikov, R. S. 1963, Astron. Zh., 40, 742 [English translation: Sov. Astron,
7, 566 (1964)]
Jenko, F., Dorland, W., Kotschenreuther, M., & Rogers, B. N. 2000, Phys.
Plasmas, 7, 1904
Kadomtsev, B. B. & Pogutse, O. P. 1974, Sov. Phys. JETP, 38, 283
Kasper, J. C., Lazarus, A. J., & Gary, S. P. 2002, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 20
Kellogg, P. J. & Horbury, T. S. 2005, Annales Geophysicae, 23, 3765
Kellogg, P. J., Bale, S. D., Mozer, F. S., Horbury, T. S., & Reme, H. 2006,
ApJ, 645, 704
Kingsep, A. S., Chukbar, K. V., & Yankov, V. V. 1990, Rev. Plasma Phys.,
16, 243
Kinney, R. & McWilliams, J. C., 1997, J. Plasma Phys., 57, 73
Kinney, R. M. & McWilliams, J. C. 1998, Phys. Rev. E, 57, 7111
Kivelson, M. G. & Southwood, D. J. 1996, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 17365
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1941, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 30, 299 [English
translation: Proc. Roy. Soc. London A, 434, 9 (1991)]
Kotschenreuther, M., Rewoldt, G., & Tang, W. M. 1995, Comp. Phys.
Comm., 88, 128
Kraichnan, R. H. 1965, Phys. Fluids, 8, 1385
Krause, F. & Rädler, K.-H. 1980, Mean-Field Magnetohydrodynamics and
Dynamo Theory (Oxford: Pergamon)
Krishan, V. & Mahajan, S. M. 2004, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A11105
Krommes, J. A. 1999, Phys. Plasmas, 6, 1477
Krommes, J. A. 2006, in Turbulence and Coherent Structures in Fluids,
Plasmas and Nonlinear Medium, eds. M. Shats & H. Punzmann
(Singapore: World Scientific), in press

47

Krommes, J. A. & Hu, G. 1994, Phys. Plasmas, 1, 3211
Kruger, S. E., Hegna, C. C., & Callen, J. D. 1998, Phys. Plasmas, 5, 4169
Kulsrud, R. M. 1964, in Teoria dei plasmi, ed. M. N. Rosenbluth (London:
Academic Press), 54
Kulsrud, R. M. 1983, in Handbook of Plasma Physics, Vol. 1, ed.
A. A. Galeev & R. N. Sudan (Amsterdam: North–Holland), 115
Landau, L. 1936, Zh. Exp. Teor. Fiz., 7, 203
Lazio, T. J. W., Cordes, J. M., de Bruyn, A. G., & Macquart, J.-P. 2004, New
Astron. Rev., 48, 1439
Leamon, R. J., Smith, C. W., Ness, N. F., Matthaeus, W. H., & Wong, H. K.
1998, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 4775
Lifschitz, E. M. & Pitaevskii, L. P. 1981, Physical Kinetics (New York:
Pergamon)
Lithwick, Y. & Goldreich, P. 2001, ApJ, 562, 279
Lithwick, Y. & Goldreich, P. 2003, ApJ, 582, 1220
Lithwick, Y., Goldreich, P., & Sridhar, S. 2006, ApJ, submitted
(astro-ph/0607243)
Loeb, A. & Waxman, E. 2007, astro-ph/0702043
Lucek, E. A., Dunlop, M. W., Horbury, T. S., Balogh, A., Brown, P., Cargill,
P., Carr, C., Fornacon, K.-H., Georgescu, E., & Oddy, T. 2001, Ann.
Geophys., 19, 1421
Markevitch, M. & Vikhlinin, A. 2007, Phys. Rep., submitted
Markevitch, M., Mazzotta, P., Vikhlinin, A., Burke, D., Butt, Y., David, L.,
Donnelly, H., Forman, W. R., Harris, D., Kin, D.-W., Virani, S., & Vrtilek,
J. 2003, ApJ, 586, L19
Maron, J. & Goldreich, P. 2001, ApJ, 554, 1175
Marsch, E. 2006, Living Rev. Solar Phys., 3, 1
Marsch, E. & Tu, C.-Y. 1990, J. Gephys. Res, 95, 11945
Marsch, E. & Tu, C.-Y. 1993, Ann. Geophys., 11, 659
Marsch, E., Ao, X.-Z.,& Tu, C.-Y. 2004, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A04102
Mason, J., Cattaneo, F., & Boldyrev, S. 2006, astro-ph/0602382
Matthaeus, W. H. & Goldstein, M. L. 1982, J. Geophys. Res., 87, 6011
Matthaeus, W. H., Goldstein, M. L., & Roberts, D. A. 1990, J. Geophys. Res.,
95, 20673
Minter, A. H. & Spangler, S. R. 1996, ApJ, 458, 194
Montgomery, D. C. 1982, Phys. Scripta, T2/1, 83
Morales, G. J., Maggs, J. E., Burke, A. T., & Peñano, J. R. 1999, Plasma
Phys. Control. Fusion, 41, A519
Müller, W.-C., Biskamp, D., & Grappin, R. 2003, Phys. Rev. E, 67, 066302
Narayan, R. & Quataert, E. 2005, Science, 307, 77
Narayan, R. & Yi, I. 1995, ApJ, 452, 710
Narita, Y., Glassmeier, K.-H., & Treumann, R. A. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett., 97,
191101
Newbury, J. A., Russell, C. T., Phillips, J. L., & Gary, S. P. 1998, J. Geophys.
Res., 103, 9553
Ng, C. S. & Bhattacharjee, A. 1996, ApJ, 465, 845
Ng, C. S. & Bhattacharjee, A. 1997, Phys. Plasmas, 4, 605
Ng, C. S., Bhattacharjee, A., Germaschewski, K., & Galtier, S. 2003, Phys.
Plasmas, 10, 1954
Norman, C. A. & Ferrara, A. 1996, ApJ, 467, 280
Obukhov, A. M. 1941, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Geogr. Geofiz., 5, 453
Obukhov, A. M. 1949, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Geogr. Geofiz., 13, 58
Osman, K. T. & Horbury, T. S. 2007, 654, L103
Oughton, S., Dmitruk, P., & Matthaeus, W. H. 2004, Phys. Plasmas, 11, 2214
Passot, T. & Sulem, P. L. 2007, Phys. Plasmas, submitted
Podesta, J. J., Roberts, D. A., & Goldstein, M. L. 2006, J. Geophys. Res.,
111, A10109
Quataert, E. 2003, Astron. Nachr., 324, 435
Quataert, E. & Gruzinov, A. 1999, ApJ, 520, 248
Ramos, J. J. 2005, Phys. Plasmas, 12, 052102
Rees, M. J., Begelman, M. C., Blandford, R. D., & Phinney, E. S. 1982,
Nature, 295, 17
Rickett, B. J., Kedziora-Chudczer, L., & Jauncey, D. L. 2002, ApJ, 581, 103
Roberts, W. W. & Hausman, M. A. 1984, ApJ, 277, 744
Rosenbluth, M. N., Hazeltine, R. D., & Hinton, F. L. 1972, Phys. Fluids, 15,
116
Rohde, R. & Elstner, D. 1998, A&A, 333, 27
Rohde, R., Beck, R. & Elstner, D. 1998, A&A, 350, 423
Rohlfs, K. & Kreitschmann, J. 1987, A&A, 178, 95
Rutherford, P. H. & Frieman, E. A. 1968, Phys. Fluids, 11, 569
Sahraoui, F., Belmont, G., Rezeau, L., Cornilleau-Wehrlin, N., Pinçon, J. L.,
& Balogh, A. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 075002
Sanders, J. S. & Fabian, A. C. 2006, MNRAS, 371, L65
Schekochihin, A. A. & Cowley, S. C. 2006a, Phys. Plasmas, 13, 056501
Schekochihin, A. A. & Cowley, S. C. 2006b, in Magnetohydrodynamics:
Historical Evolution and Trends, ed. S. Molokov, R. Moreau, &
H. K. Moffatt, (Berlin: Springer), in press (astro-ph/0507686)

48

SCHEKOCHIHIN ET AL.

Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Taylor, S. F., Maron, J. L., &
McWilliams, J. C. 2004, ApJ, 612, 276
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Kulsrud, R. M., Hammett, G. W., &
Sharma, P. 2005, ApJ, 629, 139
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., & Dorland, W. 2007a, Plasma Phys.
Control. Fusion, 49, A195
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W., Hammett, G. W., Howes,
G. G., & Quataert, E. 2007b, MNRAS, submitted
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Kulsrud, R. M., & Rosin, M. S. 2007c,
Phys. Rev. Lett., submitted
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Kulsrud, R. M., & Rosin, M. S. 2007d,
Phys. Rev. Lett., submitted
Schuecker, P., Finoguenov, A., Miniati, F., Böhringer, H., & Briel, U. G. 2004,
A&A, 426, 387
Shakura, N. I. & Sunyaeve, R. A. 1973, A&A, 24, 337
Sharma, P., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E., & Stone, J. M. 2006, ApJ, 637,
952
Sharma, P., Quataert, E., Hammett, G. W., & Stone, J. M. 2007,
astro-ph/0703572
Shebalin, J. V., Matthaeus, W. H., & Montgomery, D. 1983, J. Plasma Phys.,
29, 525
Shukurov, A. 1998, MNRAS, 299, L21
Shukurov, A. & Sokoloff, D. 1998, Studia geoph. et geod., 42, 391
Smirnova, T. V., Gwinn, C. R., & Shishov, V. I. 2006, astro-ph/0603490
Smith, C. W., Hamilton, K., Vasquez, B. J., & Leamon, R. J. 2006, ApJ, 645,
L85

Snyder, P. B. & Hammett, G. W. 2001, Phys. Plasmas, 8, 3199
Snyder, P. B., Hammett, G. W., & Dorland, W. 1997, Phys. Plasmas, 4, 3974
Sorriso-Valvo, L., Carbone, V., Bruno, R., & Veltri, P. 2006, Europhys. Lett.,
75, 832
Spangler, S. R. & Gwinn, C. R. 1990, ApJ, 353, L29
Stawicki, O., Gary, S. P., & Li, H. 2001, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 8273
Strauss, H. R. 1976, Phys. Fluids, 19, 134
Strauss, H. R. 1977, Phys. Fluids, 20, 1354
Subramanian, K., Shukurov, A., & Haugen, N. E. L. 2006, MNRAS, 366,
1437
Taylor, G. I. 1938, Proc. R. Soc. A, 164, 476
Taylor, J. B. & Hastie, R. J. 1968, Plasma Phys., 10, 479
Trotter, A. S., Moran, J. M., & Rodríguez, L. F. 1998, ApJ, 493, 666
Vogt, C. & Ensslin, T. A. 2005, A&A, 434, 67
Voitenko, Yu. M. 1998, J. Plasma Phys., 60, 515
Wilkinson, P. N., Narayan, R., & Spencer, R. E. 1994, MNRAS, 269, 67
Woo, R. & Habbal, S. R. 1997, ApJ, 474, L139
Yousef, T., Rincon, F., & Schekochihin, A. 2007, J. Fluid Mech., 575, 111
Zank, G. P. & Matthaeus, W. H., 1992, J. Plasma Phys., 48, 85
Zank, G. P. & Matthaeus, W. H., 1993, Phys. Fluids A, 5, 257
Zeldovich, Ya. B. 1957, Sov. Phys. JETP, 4, 460

