IGPG-07/03-2
gr-qc/yymmnnn

arXiv:0704.0007v1 [gr-qc] 31 Mar 2007

Polymer Quantum Mechanics and its Continuum Limit
Alejandro Corichi,1, 2, 3, ∗ Tatjana Vukašinac,4, † and José A. Zapata1, ‡
1
Instituto de Matemáticas, Unidad Morelia,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, UNAM-Campus Morelia,
A. Postal 61-3, Morelia, Michoacán 58090, Mexico
2
Departamento de Gravitación y Teorı́a de Campos,
Instituto de Ciencias Nucleares, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
A. Postal 70-543, México D.F. 04510, Mexico
3
Institute for Gravitational Physics and Geometry, Physics Department,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park PA 16802, USA
4
Facultad de Ingenierı́a Civil, Universidad Michoacana
de San Nicolas de Hidalgo, Morelia, Michoacán, Mexico

Abstract
A rather non-standard quantum representation of the canonical commutation relations of quantum mechanics systems, known as the polymer representation has gained some attention in recent
years, due to its possible relation with Planck scale physics. In particular, this approach has been
followed in a symmetric sector of loop quantum gravity known as loop quantum cosmology (LQC).
Here we explore different aspects of the relation between the ordinary Schrödinger theory and the
polymer description. The paper has two parts. In the first one, we derive the polymer quantum
mechanics starting from the ordinary Schrödinger theory and show that the polymer description
arises as an appropriate limit. In the second part we consider the continuum limit of this theory,
namely, the reverse process in which one starts from the discrete theory and tries to recover back
the ordinary Schrödinger quantum mechanics. We consider several examples of interest, including
the harmonic oscillator, the free particle and a simple cosmological model.
PACS numbers: 04.60.Pp, 04.60.Ds, 04.60.Nc 11.10.Gh.

∗

Electronic address: corichi@matmor.unam.mx
Electronic address: tatjana@shi.matmor.unam.mx
‡
Electronic address: zapata@matmor.unam.mx
†

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The so-called polymer quantum mechanics, a non-standard and somewhat 'exotic' representation of the canonical commutation relations (CCR), has been used to explore both
mathematical and physical issues in background independent theories such as quantum gravity [1, 2, 3]. A notable example of this type of quantization, when applied to minisuperspace
models has given way to what is known as loop quantum cosmology [4, 5]. As in any toy
model situation, one hopes to learn about the subtle technical and conceptual issues that are
present in full quantum gravity by means of simple, finite dimensional examples. This formalism is not an exception in this regard. Apart from this motivation coming from physics
at the Planck scale, one can independently ask for the relation between the standard continuous representations and their polymer cousins at the level of mathematical physics. A
deeper understanding of this relation becomes important on its own.
The polymer quantization is made of several steps. The first one is to build a representation of the Heisenberg-Weyl algebra on a Kinematical Hilbert space that is "background
independent", and that is sometimes referred to as the polymeric Hilbert space Hpoly . The
second and most important part, the implementation of dynamics, deals with the definition
of a Hamiltonian (or Hamiltonian constraint) on this space. In the examples studied so far,
the first part is fairly well understood, yielding the kinematical Hilbert space Hpoly that is,
however, non-separable. For the second step, a natural implementation of the dynamics has
proved to be a bit more difficult, given that a direct definition of the Hamiltonian Ĥ of, say,
a particle on a potential on the space Hpoly is not possible since one of the main features
of this representation is that the operators q̂ and p̂ cannot be both simultaneously defined
(nor their analogues in theories involving more elaborate variables). Thus, any operator
that involves (powers of) the not defined variable has to be regulated by a well defined
operator which normally involves introducing some extra structure on the configuration (or
momentum) space, namely a lattice. However, this new structure that plays the role of a
regulator can not be removed when working in Hpoly and one is left with the ambiguity that
is present in any regularization. The freedom in choosing it can be sometimes associated
with a length scale (the lattice spacing). For ordinary quantum systems such as a simple
harmonic oscillator, that has been studied in detail from the polymer viewpoint, it has been
argued that if this length scale is taken to be 'sufficiently small', one can arbitrarily approximate standard Schrödinger quantum mechanics [2, 3]. In the case of loop quantum
cosmology, the minimum area gap A0 of the full quantum gravity theory imposes such a
scale, that is then taken to be fundamental [4].
A natural question is to ask what happens when we change this scale and go to even
smaller 'distances', that is, when we refine the lattice on which the dynamics of the theory
is defined. Can we define consistency conditions between these scales? Or even better,
can we take the limit and find thus a continuum limit? As it has been shown recently in
detail, the answer to both questions is in the affirmative [6]. There, an appropriate notion
of scale was defined in such a way that one could define refinements of the theory and
pose in a precise fashion the question of the continuum limit of the theory. These results
could also be seen as handing a procedure to remove the regulator when working on the
appropriate space. The purpose of this paper is to further explore different aspects of the
relation between the continuum and the polymer representation. In particular in the first
part we put forward a novel way of deriving the polymer representation from the ordinary
Schrödinger representation as an appropriate limit. In Sec. II we derive two versions of
2

the polymer representation as different limits of the Schrödinger theory. In Sec. III we
show that these two versions can be seen as different polarizations of the 'abstract' polymer
representation. These results, to the best of our knowledge, are new and have not been
reported elsewhere. In Sec. IV we pose the problem of implementing the dynamics on the
polymer representation. In Sec. V we motivate further the question of the continuum limit
(i.e. the proper removal of the regulator) and recall the basic constructions of [6]. Several
examples are considered in Sec. VI. In particular a simple harmonic oscillator, the polymer
free particle and a simple quantum cosmology model are considered. The free particle and
the cosmological model represent a generalization of the results obtained in [6] where only
systems with a discrete and non-degenerate spectrum where considered. We end the paper
with a discussion in Sec. VII.
II.

QUANTIZATION AND POLYMER REPRESENTATION

In this section we derive the so called polymer representation of quantum mechanics starting from a specific reformulation of the ordinary Schrödinger representation. Our starting
point will be the simplest of all possible phase spaces, namely Γ = R2 corresponding to a
particle living on the real line R. Let us choose coordinates (q, p) thereon. As a first step
we shall consider the quantization of this system that leads to the standard quantum theory
in the Schrödinger description. A convenient route is to introduce the necessary structure
to define the Fock representation of such system. From this perspective, the passage to the
polymeric case becomes clearest. Roughly speaking by a quantization one means a passage
from the classical algebraic bracket, the Poisson bracket,
{q, p} = 1

(1)

to a quantum bracket given by the commutator of the corresponding operators,
[ q̂, p̂] = i~ 1̂

(2)

These relations, known as the canonical commutation relation (CCR) become the most
common corner stone of the (kinematics of the) quantum theory; they should be satisfied
by the quantum system, when represented on a Hilbert space H.
There are alternative points of departure for quantum kinematics. Here we consider the
algebra generated by the exponentiated versions of q̂ and p̂ that are denoted by,
U(α) = ei(α q̂)/~

;

V (β) = ei(β p̂)/~

where α and β have dimensions of momentum and length, respectively. The CCR now
become
U(α) * V (β) = e(−iα β)/~V (β) * U(α)
(3)
and the rest of the product is

U(α1 ) * U(α2 ) = U(α1 + α2 ) ;

V (β1 ) * V (β2 ) = V (β1 + β2 )

The Weyl algebra W is generated by taking finite linear combinations of the generators
U(αi ) and V (βi ) where the product (3) is extended by linearity,
X
(Ai U(αi ) + Bi V (βi ))
i

3

From this perspective, quantization means finding an unitary representation of the Weyl
algebra W on a Hilbert space H′ (that could be different from the ordinary Schrödinger
representation). At first it might look weird to attempt this approach given that we know
how to quantize such a simple system; what do we need such a complicated object as W
for? It is infinite dimensional, whereas the set S = {1̂, q̂, p̂}, the starting point of the
ordinary Dirac quantization, is rather simple. It is in the quantization of field systems
that the advantages of the Weyl approach can be fully appreciated, but it is also useful for
introducing the polymer quantization and comparing it to the standard quantization. This
is the strategy that we follow.
A question that one can ask is whether there is any freedom in quantizing the system to
obtain the ordinary Schrödinger representation. On a first sight it might seem that there
is none given the Stone-Von Neumann uniqueness theorem. Let us review what would be
the argument for the standard construction. Let us ask that the representation we want to
build up is of the Schrödinger type, namely, where states are wave functions of configuration
space ψ(q). There are two ingredients to the construction of the representation, namely
the specification of how the basic operators (q̂, p̂) will act, and the nature of the space of
functions that ψ belongs to, that is normally fixed by the choice of inner product on H, or
measure μ on R. The standard choice is to select the Hilbert space to be,
H = L2 (R, dq)
the space of square-integrable functions with respect to the Lebesgue measure dq (invariant
under constant translations) on R. The operators are then represented as,
q̂ * ψ(q) = (q ψ)(q) and p̂ * ψ(q) = −i ~

∂
ψ(q)
∂q

(4)

Is it possible to find other representations? In order to appreciate this freedom we go to
the Weyl algebra and build the quantum theory thereon. The representation of the Weyl
algebra that can be called of the 'Fock type' involves the definition of an extra structure on
the phase space Γ: a complex structure J. That is, a linear mapping from Γ to itself such
that J 2 = −1. In 2 dimensions, all the freedom in the choice of J is contained in the choice
of a parameter d with dimensions of length. It is also convenient to define: k = p/~ that
has dimensions of 1/L. We have then,
Jd : (q, k) 7→ (−d2 k, q/d2 )
This object together with the symplectic structure: Ω((q, p); (q ′, p′ )) = q p′ − p q ′ define an
inner product on Γ by the formula gd (* ; *) = Ω(* ; Jd *) such that:
gd ((q, p); (q ′, p′ )) =

1
d2 ′
′
q
q
+
pp
d2
~2

which is dimension-less and positive definite. Note that with this quantities one can define
complex coordinates (ζ, ζ̄) as usual:
ζ=

d
1
q+i p ;
d
~

ζ̄ =

1
d
q−i p
d
~

from which one can build the standard Fock representation. Thus, one can alternatively view
the introduction of the length parameter d as the quantity needed to define (dimensionless)
4

complex coordinates on the phase space. But what is the relevance of this object (J or
d)? The definition of complex coordinates is useful for the construction of the Fock space
since from them one can define, in a natural way, creation and annihilation operators. But
for the Schrödinger representation we are interested here, it is a bit more subtle. The
subtlety is that within this approach one uses the algebraic properties of W to construct the
Hilbert space via what is known as the Gel'fand-Naimark-Segal (GNS) construction. This
implies that the measure in the Schrödinger representation becomes non trivial and thus
the momentum operator acquires an extra term in order to render the operator self-adjoint.
The representation of the Weyl algebra is then, when acting on functions φ(q) [7]:
Û (α) * φ(q) := (eiα q/~ φ)(q)
and,
β

V̂ (β) * φ(q) := e d2 (q−β/2) φ(q − β)

The Hilbert space structure is introduced by the definition of an algebraic state (a positive
linear functional) ωd : W → C, that must coincide with the expectation value in the Hilbert
space taken on a special state refered to as the vacuum: ωd (a) = hâivac , for all a ∈ W. In
our case this specification of J induces such a unique state ωd that yields,
1 d2 α2
~2

hÛ (α)ivac = e− 4
and

1 β2

hV̂ (β)ivac = e− 4 d2

(5)

(6)

Note that the exponents in the vacuum expectation values correspond to the metric con2
2 2
structed out of J: d ~2α = gd ((0, α); (0, α)) and βd2 = gd ((β, 0); (β, 0)). Wave functions
belong to the space L2 (R, dμd ), where the measure that dictates the inner product in this
representation is given by,
q2
1
dμd = √ e− d2 dq
d π
In this representation, the vacuum is given by the identity function φ0 (q) = 1 that is, just
as any plane wave, normalized. Note that for each value of d > 0, the representation is
well defined and continuous in α and β. Note also that there is an equivalence between the
q-representation defined by d and the k-representation defined by 1/d.
How can we recover then the standard representation in which the measure is given by
the Lebesgue measure and the operators are represented as in (4)? It is easy to see that
there is an isometric isomorphism K that maps the d-representation in Hd to the standard
Schrödinger representation in Hschr by:
q2

e− 2 d2
ψ(q) = K * φ(q) = 1/2 1/4 φ(q) ∈ Hschr = L2 (R, dq)
d π
Thus we see that all d-representations are unitarily equivalent. This was to be expected in
view of the Stone-Von Neumann uniqueness result. Note also that the vacuum now becomes
ψ0 (q) =

2
1
− q2
2d ,
e
d1/2 π 1/4

5

so even when there is no information about the parameter d in the representation itself,
it is contained in the vacuum state. This procedure for constructing the GNS-Schrödinger
representation for quantum mechanics has also been generalized to scalar fields on arbitrary
curved space in [8]. Note, however that so far the treatment has all been kinematical,
without any knowledge of a Hamiltonian. For the Simple Harmonic Oscillator of mass
q m
and frequency ω, there is a natural choice compatible with the dynamics given by d = m~ω ,
in which some calculations simplify (for instance for coherent states), but in principle one
can use any value of d.
Our study will be simplified by focusing on the fundamental entities in the Hilbert Space
Hd , namely those states generated by acting with Û(α) on the vacuum φ0 (q) = 1. Let us
denote those states by,
1
φα (q) = Û(α) * φ0 (q) = ei ~ α q
The inner product between two such states is given by
Z
(λ−α)2 d2
iαq
iλq
hφα , φλid = dμd e− ~ e ~ = e− 4 ~2

(7)

Note incidentally that, contrary to some common belief, the 'plane waves' in this GNS
Hilbert space are indeed normalizable.
Let us now consider the polymer representation. For that, it is important to note that
there are two possible limiting cases for the parameter d: i) The limit 1/d 7→ 0 and ii) The
case d 7→ 0. In both cases, we have expressions that become ill defined in the representation
or measure, so one needs to be careful.
A.

The 1/d 7→ 0 case.

The first observation is that from the expressions (5) and (6) for the algebraic state ωd , we
see that the limiting cases are indeed well defined. In our case we get, ωA := lim1/d→0 ωd
such that,
ωA (Û(α)) = δα,0
and
ωA (V̂ (β)) = 1
(8)
From this, we can indeed construct the representation by means of the GNS construction.
In order to do that and to show how this is obtained we shall consider several expressions.
One has to be careful though, since the limit has to be taken with care. Let us consider the
measure on the representation that behaves as:
q2
1
1
dμd = √ e− d2 dq 7→ √ dq
d π
d π

so the measures tends to an homogeneous measure but whose 'normalization constant' goes
to zero, so the limit becomes somewhat subtle. We shall return to this point later.
Let us now see what happens to the inner product between the fundamental entities in
the Hilbert Space Hd given by (7). It is immediate to see that in the 1/d 7→ 0 limit the
inner product becomes,
hφα , φλid 7→ δα,λ
(9)

with δα,λ being Kronecker's delta. We see then that the plane waves φα (q) become an
orthonormal basis for the new Hilbert space. Therefore, there is a delicate interplay between
6

the two terms that contribute to the measure in order to maintain the normalizability of
these functions; we need the measure to become damped (by 1/d) in order to avoid that the
plane waves acquire an infinite norm (as happens with the standard Lebesgue measure), but
on the other hand the measure, that for any finite value of d is a Gaussian, becomes more
and more spread.
It is important to note that, in this limit, the operators Û (α) become discontinuous with
respect to α, given that for any given α1 and α2 (different), its action on a given basis
vector ψλ (q) yields orthogonal vectors. Since the continuity of these operators is one of the
hypotesis of the Stone-Von Neumann theorem, the uniqueness result does not apply here.
The representation is inequivalent to the standard one.
Let us now analyze the other operator, namely the action of the operator V̂ (β) on the
basis φα (q):
β2

V̂ (β) * φα (q) = e− 2d2 −i

αβ
~

2 +iα/~)q

e(β/d

which in the limit 1/d 7→ 0 goes to,

V̂ (β) * φα (q) 7→ ei

αβ
~

φα (q)

that is continuous on β. Thus, in the limit, the operator p̂ = −i~∂q is well defined. Also,
note that in this limit the operator p̂ has φα (q) as its eigenstate with eigenvalue given by α:
p̂ * φα (q) 7→ α φα (q)
To summarize, the resulting theory obtained by taking the limit 1/d 7→ 0 of the ordinary
Schrödinger description, that we shall call the 'polymer representation of type A', has the
following features: the operators U(α) are well defined but not continuous in α, so there
is no generator (no operator associated to q). The basis vectors φα are orthonormal (for α
taking values on a continuous set) and are eigenvectors of the operator p̂ that is well defined.
The resulting Hilbert space HA will be the (A-version of the) polymer representation. Let
us now consider the other case, namely, the limit when d 7→ 0.
B.

The d 7→ 0 case

Let us now explore the other limiting case of the Schrödinger/Fock representations labelled
by the parameter d. Just as in the previous case, the limiting algebraic state becomes,
ωB := limd→0 ωd such that,
ωB (Û(α)) = 1

and

ωB (V̂ (β)) = δβ,0

(10)

From this positive linear function, one can indeed construct the representation using the
GNS construction.
First let us note that the measure, even when the limit has to be taken with due care,
behaves as:
q2
1
dμd = √ e− d2 dq 7→ δ(q) dq
d π
That is, as Dirac's delta distribution. It is immediate to see that, in the d 7→ 0 limit, the
inner product between the fundamental states φα (q) becomes,
hφα , φλ id 7→ 1
7

(11)

This in fact means that the vector ξ = φα − φλ belongs to the Kernel of the limiting inner
product, so one has to mod out by these (and all) zero norm states in order to get the
Hilbert space.
Let us now analyze the other operator, namely the action of the operator V̂ (β) on the
vacuum φ0 (q) = 1, which for arbitrary d has the form,
β

φ̃β := V̂ (β) * φ0 (q) = e d2 (q−β/2)
The inner product between two such states is given by
1

2

hφ̃α , φ̃β id = e− 4d2 (α−β)

In the limit d → 0, hφ̃α , φ̃β id → δα,β . We can see then that it is these functions that become
the orthonormal, 'discrete basis' in the theory. However, the function φ̃β (q) in this limit
becomes ill defined. For example, for β > 0, it grows unboundedly for q > β/2, is equal
to one if q = β/2 and zero otherwise. In order to overcome these difficulties and make
more transparent the resulting theory, we shall consider the other form of the representation
in which the measure is incorporated into the states (and the resulting Hilbert space is
L2 (R, dq)). Thus the new state
ψβ (q) := K * (V̂ (β) * φ0 (q)) =

2
β
1
2
1
1
−q
(q−β/2)
= √ 1 e− 2d2 (q−β)
√ 1 e 2d2 e d2
(d π) 2
(d π) 2

(12)

We can now take the limit and what we get is
lim ψβ (q) := δ 1/2 (q, β)

d7→0

where by δ 1/2 (q, β) we mean something like 'the square root of the Dirac distribution'. What
we really mean is an object that satisfies the following property:
δ 1/2 (q, β) * δ 1/2 (q, α) = δ(q, β) δβ,α
That is, if α = β then it is just the ordinary delta, otherwise it is zero. In a sense these
object can be regarded as half-densities that can not be integrated by themselves, but whose
product can. We conclude then that the inner product is,
Z
Z
hψβ , ψα i =
dq ψβ (q) ψα (q) =
dq δ(q, α) δβ,α = δβ,α
(13)
R

R

which is just what we expected. Note that in this representation, the vacuum state becomes
ψ0 (q) := δ 1/2 (q, 0), namely, the half-delta with support in the origin. It is important to
note that we are arriving in a natural way to states as half-densities, whose squares can
be integrated without the need of a measure on the configuration space. Diffeomorphism
invariance arises then in a natural but subtle manner.
Note that as the end result we recover the Kronecker delta inner product for the new
fundamental states:
χβ (q) := δ 1/2 (q, β).

8

Thus, in this new B-polymer representation, the Hilbert space HB is the completion with
respect to the inner product (13) of the states generated by taking (finite) linear combinations
of basis elements of the form χβ :
X
Ψ(q) =
bi χβi (q)
(14)
i

Let us now introduce an equivalent description of this Hilbert space. Instead of having the
basis elements be half-deltas as elements of the Hilbert space where the inner product is
given by the ordinary Lebesgue measure dq, we redefine both the basis and the measure.
We could consider, instead of a half-delta with support β, a Kronecker delta or characteristic
function with support on β:
χ′β (q) := δq,β
These functions have a similar behavior with respect to the product as the half-deltas,
namely: χ′β (q) * χ′α (q) = δβ,α . The main difference is that neither χ′ nor their squares are
integrable with respect to the Lebesgue measure (having zero norm). In order to fix that
problem we have to change the measure so that we recover the basic inner product (13)
with our new basis. The needed measure turns out to be the discrete counting measure on
R. Thus any state in the 'half density basis' can be written (using the same expression) in
terms of the 'Kronecker basis'. For more details and further motivation see the next section.
Note that in this B-polymer representation, both Û and V̂ have their roles interchanged
with that of the A-polymer representation: while U(α) is discontinuous and thus q̂ is not
defined in the A-representation, we have that it is V (β) in the B-representation that has
this property. In this case, it is the operator p̂ that can not be defined. We see then
that given a physical system for which the configuration space has a well defined physical
meaning, within the possible representation in which wave-functions are functions of the
configuration variable q, the A and B polymer representations are radically different and
inequivalent.
Having said this, it is also true that the A and B representations are equivalent in a
different sense, by means of the duality between q and p representations and the d ↔ 1/d
duality: The A-polymer representation in the "q-representation" is equivalent to the Bpolymer representation in the "p-representation", and conversely. When studying a problem,
it is important to decide from the beginning which polymer representation (if any) one should
be using (for instance in the q-polarization). This has as a consequence an implication on
which variable is naturally "quantized" (even if continuous): p for A and q for B. There could
be for instance a physical criteria for this choice. For example a fundamental symmetry
could suggest that one representation is more natural than another one. This indeed has
been recently noted by Chiou in [10], where the Galileo group is investigated and where it
is shown that the B representation is better behaved.
In the other polarization, namely for wavefunctions of p, the picture gets reversed: q
is discrete for the A-representation, while p is for the B-case. Let us end this section by
noting that the procedure of obtaining the polymer quantization by means of an appropriate
limit of Fock-Schrödinger representations might prove useful in more general settings in field
theory or quantum gravity.

9

III.

POLYMER QUANTUM MECHANICS: KINEMATICS

In previous sections we have derived what we have called the A and B polymer representations (in the q-polarization) as limiting cases of ordinary Fock representations. In
this section, we shall describe, without any reference to the Schrödinger representation, the
'abstract' polymer representation and then make contact with its two possible realizations,
closely related to the A and B cases studied before. What we will see is that one of them
(the A case) will correspond to the p-polarization while the other one corresponds to the
q−representation, when a choice is made about the physical significance of the variables.
We can start by defining abstract kets |μi labelled by a real number μ. These shall
belong to the Hilbert space Hpoly . From these states, we define a generic 'cylinder states'
that correspond to a choice of a finite collection of numbers μi ∈ R with i = 1, 2, . . . , N.
Associated to this choice, there are N vectors |μi i, so we can take a linear combination of
them
N
X
ai |μii
(15)
|ψi =
i=1

The polymer inner product between the fundamental kets is given by,
hν|μi = δν,μ

(16)

That is, the kets are orthogonal to each other (when ν 6= μ) and they are normalized
P
(hμ|μi = 1). Immediately, this implies that, given any two vectors |φi = M
j=1 bj |νj i and
PN
|ψi = i=1 ai |μii, the inner product between them is given by,
XX
X
b̄k ak
hφ|ψi =
b̄j ai hνj |μi i =
i

j

k

where the sum is over k that labels the intersection points between the set of labels {νj }
and {μi }. The Hilbert space Hpoly is the Cauchy completion of finite linear combination of
the form (15) with respect to the inner product (16). Hpoly is non-separable. There are two
basic operators on this Hilbert space: the 'label operator' ε̂:
ε̂ |μi := μ |μi
and the displacement operator ŝ (λ),
ŝ (λ) |μi := |μ + λi
The operator ε̂ is symmetric and the operator(s) ŝ(λ) defines a one-parameter family of
unitary operators on Hpoly , where its adjoint is given by ŝ† (λ) = ŝ (−λ). This action is
however, discontinuous with respect to λ given that |μi and |μ + λi are always orthogonal,
no matter how small is λ. Thus, there is no (Hermitian) operator that could generate ŝ (λ)
by exponentiation.
So far we have given the abstract characterization of the Hilbert space, but one would like
to make contact with concrete realizations as wave functions, or by identifying the abstract
operators ε̂ and ŝ with physical operators.
Suppose we have a system with a configuration space with coordinate given by q, and p
denotes its canonical conjugate momenta. Suppose also that for physical reasons we decide
10

that the configuration coordinate q will have some "discrete character" (for instance, if it
is to be identified with position, one could say that there is an underlying discreteness in
position at a small scale). How can we implement such requirements by means of the polymer
representation? There are two possibilities, depending on the choice of 'polarizations' for
the wavefunctions, namely whether they will be functions of configuration q or momenta p.
Let us the divide the discussion into two parts.
A.

Momentum polarization

In this polarization, states will be denoted by,
ψ(p) = hp|ψi
where

μp

ψμ (p) = hp|μi = ei ~

How are then the operators ε̂ and ŝ represented? Note that if we associate the multiplicative
operator
(μ+λ)
λp
μp
V̂ (λ) * ψμ (p) = ei ~ ei ~ = ei ~ p = hp|μ + λi = ψ(μ+λ) (p)
we see then that the operator V̂ (λ) corresponds precisely to the shift operator ŝ (λ). Thus
we can also conclude that the operator p̂ does not exist. It is now easy to identify the
operator q̂ with:
μp
∂
ψμ (p) = μ ei ~ = μ ψμ (p)
q̂ * ψμ (p) = −i~
∂p
namely, with the abstract operator ε̂. The reason we say that q̂ is discrete is because this
operator has as its eigenvalue the label μ of the elementary state ψμ (p), and this label, even
when it can take value in a continuum of possible values, is to be understood as a discrete
set, given that the states are orthonormal for all values of μ. Given that states are now
functions of p, the inner product (16) should be defined by a measure μ on the space on
which the wave-functions are defined. In order to know what these two objects are, namely,
the quantum "configuration" space C and the measure thereon1 , we have to make use of
the tools available to us from the theory of C ∗ -algebras. If we consider the operators V̂ (λ),
together with their natural product and ∗-relation given by V̂ ∗ (λ) = V̂ (−λ), they have
the structure of an Abelian C ∗ -algebra (with unit) A. We know from the representation
theory of such objects that A is isomorphic to the space of continuous functions C 0 (∆)
on a compact space ∆, the spectrum of A. Any representation of A on a Hilbert space
as multiplication operator will be on spaces of the form L2 (∆, dμ). That is, our quantum
configuration space is the spectrum of the algebra, which in our case corresponds to the
Bohr compactification Rb of the real line [11]. This space is a compact group and there is
a natural probability measure defined on it, the Haar measure μH . Thus, our Hilbert space
Hpoly will be isomorphic to the space,
Hpoly,p = L2 (Rb , dμH )
1

(17)

here we use the standard terminology of 'configuration space' to denote the domain of the wave function
even when, in this case, it corresponds to the physical momenta p.

11

In terms of 'quasi periodic functions' generated by ψμ (p), the inner product takes the form
1
hψμ |ψλ i :=
dμH ψμ (p) ψλ (p) := lim
L7→∞ 2L
Rb
Z

Z

L

dp ψμ (p) ψλ (p) = δμ,λ

(18)

−L

note that in the p-polarization, this characterization corresponds to the 'A-version' of the
polymer representation of Sec. II (where p and q are interchanged).
B.

q-polarization

Let us now consider the other polarization in which wave functions will depend on the
configuration coordinate q:
ψ(q) = hq|ψi
The basic functions, that now will be called ψ̃μ (q), should be, in a sense, the dual of the functions ψμ (p) of the previous subsection. We can try to define them via a 'Fourier transform':
Z
Z
Z
pq
μp
ψ̃μ (q) := hq|μi = hq|
dμH |pihp|μi =
dμH hq|piψμ (p) =
dμH e−i ~ ei ~ = δq,μ (19)
Rb

Rb

Rb

That is, the basic objects in this representation are Kronecker deltas. This is precisely what
we had found in Sec. II for the B-type representation. How are now the basic operators
represented and what is the form of the inner product? Regarding the operators, we expect
that they are represented in the opposite manner as in the previous p-polarization case, but
that they preserve the same features: p̂ does not exist (the derivative of the Kronecker delta
is ill defined), but its exponentiated version V̂ (λ) does:
V̂ (λ) * ψ(q) = ψ(q + λ)
and the operator q̂ that now acts as multiplication has as its eigenstates, the functions
ψ̃ν (q) = δν,q :
q̂ * ψ̃μ (q) := μ ψ̃μ (q)

What is now the nature of the quantum configurations space Q? And what is the measure
thereon dμq ? that defines the inner product we should have:
hψ̃μ (q), ψ̃λ (q)i = δμ,λ

The answer comes from one of the characterizations of the Bohr compactification: we know
that it is, in a precise sense, dual to the real line but when equipped with the discrete
topology Rd . Furthermore, the measure on Rd will be the 'counting measure'. In this way we
recover the same properties we had for the previous characterization of the polymer Hilbert
space. We can thus write:
Hpoly,x := L2 (Rd , dμc )
(20)

This completes a precise construction of the B-type polymer representation sketched in the
previous section. Note that if we had chosen the opposite physical situation, namely that q,
the configuration observable, be the quantity that does not have a corresponding operator,
then we would have had the opposite realization: In the q-polarization we would have had
12

the type-A polymer representation and the type-B for the p-polarization. As we shall see
both scenarios have been considered in the literature.
Up to now we have only focused our discussion on the kinematical aspects of the quantization process. Let us now consider in the following section the issue of dynamics and recall
the approach that had been adopted in the literature, before the issue of the removal of the
regulator was reexamined in [6].
IV.

POLYMER QUANTUM MECHANICS: DYNAMICS

As we have seen the construction of the polymer representation is rather natural and leads
to a quantum theory with different properties than the usual Schrödinger counterpart such
as its non-separability, the non-existence of certain operators and the existence of normalized
eigen-vectors that yield a precise value for one of the phase space coordinates. This has been
done without any regard for a Hamiltonian that endows the system with a dynamics, energy
and so on.
First let us consider the simplest case of a particle of mass m in a potential V (q), in
which the Hamiltonian H takes the form,
H=

1 2
p + V (q)
2m

Suppose furthermore that the potential is given by a non-periodic function, such as a polynomial or a rational function. We can immediately see that a direct implementation of the
Hamiltonian is out of our reach, for the simple reason that, as we have seen, in the polymer representation we can either represent q or p, but not both! What has been done so
far in the literature? The simplest thing possible: approximate the non-existing term by a
well defined function that can be quantized and hope for the best. As we shall see in next
sections, there is indeed more that one can do.
At this point there is also an important decision to be made: which variable q or p should
be regarded as "discrete"? Once this choice is made, then it implies that the other variable
will not exist: if q is regarded as discrete, then p will not exist and we need to approximate
the kinetic term p2 /2m by something else; if p is to be the discrete quantity, then q will
not be defined and then we need to approximate the potential V (q). What happens with a
periodic potential? In this case one would be modelling, for instance, a particle on a regular
lattice such as a phonon living on a crystal, and then the natural choice is to have q not
well defined. Furthermore, the potential will be well defined and there is no approximation
needed.
In the literature both scenarios have been considered. For instance, when considering a
quantum mechanical system in [2], the position was chosen to be discrete, so p does not
exist, and one is then in the A type for the momentum polarization (or the type B for the
q-polarization). With this choice, it is the kinetic term the one that has to be approximated,
so once one has done this, then it is immediate to consider any potential that will thus be
well defined. On the other hand, when considering loop quantum cosmology (LQC), the
standard choice is that the configuration variable is not defined [4]. This choice is made
given that LQC is regarded as the symmetric sector of full loop quantum gravity where
the connection (that is regarded as the configuration variable) can not be promoted to an
operator and one can only define its exponentiated version, namely, the holonomy. In that
case, the canonically conjugate variable, closely related to the volume, becomes 'discrete',
13

just as in the full theory. This case is however, different from the particle in a potential
example. First we could mention that the functional form of the Hamiltonian constraint
that implements dynamics has a different structure, but the more important difference lies
in that the system is constrained.
Let us return to the case of the particle in a potential and for definiteness, let us start
with the auxiliary kinematical framework in which: q is discrete, p can not be promoted
and thus we have to approximate the kinetic term p̂2 /2m. How is this done? The standard
prescription is to define, on the configuration space C, a regular 'graph' γμ0 . This consists
of a numerable set of points, equidistant, and characterized by a parameter μ0 that is the
(constant) separation between points. The simplest example would be to consider the set
γμ0 = {q ∈ R | q = n μ0 , ∀ n ∈ Z}.
This means that the basic kets that will be considered |μn i will correspond precisely to
labels μn belonging to the graph γμ0 , that is, μn = n μ0 . Thus, we shall only consider states
of the form,
X
|ψi =
bn |μn i .
(21)
n

This 'small' Hilbert space Hγμ0 , the graph Hilbert space, is a subspace of the 'large' polymer
Hilbert space Hpoly but it is separable. The condition for a state
P of 2the form (21) to belong
to the Hilbert space Hγμ0 is that the coefficients bn satisfy:
n |bn | < ∞.
Let us now consider the kinetic term p̂2 /2m. We have to approximate it by means of
trigonometric functions, that can be built out of the functions of the form eiλ p/~. As we
have seen in previous sections, these functions can indeed be promoted to operators and act
as translation operators on the kets |μi. If we want to remain in the graph γ, and not create
'new points', then one is constrained to considering operators that displace the kets by just
the right amount. That is, we want the basic shift operator V̂ (λ) to be such that it maps
the ket with label |μn i to the next ket, namely |μn+1 i. This can indeed achieved by fixing,
once and for all, the value of the allowed parameter λ to be λ = μ0 . We have then,
V̂ (μ0 ) * |μn i = |μn + μ0 i = |μn+1 i
which is what we wanted. This basic 'shift operator' will be the building block for approximating any (polynomial) function of p. In order to do that we notice that the function p
can be approximated by,
μ p

μ p
~
~  i μ0 p
0
−i 0~
~
p≈
sin
=
e
−e
μ0
~
2iμ0

where the approximation is good for p << ~/μ0 . Thus, one can define a regulated operator
p̂μ0 that depends on the 'scale' μ0 as:
p̂μ0 * |μn i :=

~
i~
[V (μ0 ) − V (−μ0 )] * |μn i =
(|μn+1i − |μn−1i)
2iμ0
2μ0

(22)

In order to regulate the operator p̂2 , there are (at least) two possibilities, namely to compose
the operator p̂μ0 with itself or to define a new approximation. The operator p̂μ0 * p̂μ0 has the
feature that shifts the states two steps in the graph to both sides. There is however another
operator that only involves shifting once:
p̂2μ0 * |νn i :=

~2
~2
[2
−
V̂
(μ
)
−
V̂
(−μ
)]
*
|ν
i
=
(2|νn i − |νn+1 i − |νn−1 i)
0
0
n
μ20
μ20
14

(23)

which corresponds to the approximation p2 ≈

2~2
(1
μ20

− cos(μ0 p/~)), valid also in the regime

p << ~/μ0 . With these considerations, one can define the operator Ĥμ0 , the Hamiltonian
at scale μ0 , that in practice 'lives' on the space Hγμ0 as,
Ĥμ0 :=

1 2
p̂ + V̂ (q) ,
2m μ0

(24)

that is a well defined, symmetric operator on Hγμ0 . Notice that the operator is also defined
on Hpoly , but there its physical interpretation is problematic. For example, it turns out
that the expectation value of the kinetic term calculated on most states (states which are
not tailored to the exact value of the parameter μ0 ) is zero. Even if one takes a state
that gives "reasonable" expectation values of the μ0 -kinetic term and uses it to calculate the
expectation value of the kinetic term corresponding to a slight perturbation of the parameter
μ0 one would get zero. This problem, and others that arise when working on Hpoly , forces one
to assign a physical interpretation to the Hamiltonian Ĥμ0 only when its action is restricted
to the subspace Hγμ0 .
Let us now explore the form that the Hamiltonian takes in the two possible polarizations.
In the q-polarization, the basis, labelled by n is given by the functions χn (q) = δq,μn . That
is, the wave functions will only have support on the set γμ0 . Alternatively, one can think of
a state as completely characterized by the 'Fourier coefficients' an : ψ(q) ↔ an , which is the
value that the wave function ψ(q) takes at the point q = μn = n μ0 . Thus, the Hamiltonian
takes the form of a difference equation when acting on a general state ψ(q). Solving the time
independent Schrödinger equation Ĥ * ψ = E ψ amounts to solving the difference equation
for the coefficients an .
The momentum polarization has a different structure. In this case, the operator p̂2μ0 acts
as a multiplication operator,
p̂2μ0 * ψ(p) =

 μ p i
2~2 h
0
1
−
cos
ψ(p)
μ20
~

(25)

The operator corresponding to q will be represented as a derivative operator
q̂ * ψ(p) := i~ ∂p ψ(p).
For a generic potential V (q), it has to be defined by means of spectral theory defined now
on a circle. Why on a circle? For the simple reason that by restricting ourselves to a regular
graph γμ0 , the functions of p that preserve it (when acting as shift operators) are of the form
e(i m μ0 p/~) for m integer. That is, what we have are Fourier modes, labelled by m, of period
2π ~/μ0 in p. Can we pretend then that the phase space variable p is now compactified? The
answer is in the affirmative. The inner product on periodic functions ψμ0 (p) of p coming
from the full Hilbert space Hpoly and given by
Z L
1
hφ(p)|ψ(p)ipoly = lim
dp φ(p) ψ(p)
L7→∞ 2L −L
is precisely equivalent to the inner product on the circle given by the uniform measure
Z π~/μ0
μ0
dp φ(p) ψ(p)
hφ(p)|ψ(p)iμ0 =
2π~ −π~/μ0
15

with p ∈ (−π~/μ0 , π~/μ0 ). As long as one restricts attention to the graph γμ0 , one can work
in this separable Hilbert space Hγμ0 of square integrable functions on S 1 . Immediately, one
can see the limitations of this description. If the mechanical system to be quantized is such
that its orbits have values of the momenta p that are not small compared with π~/μ0 then
the approximation taken will be very poor, and we don't expect neither the effective classical
description nor its quantization to be close to the standard one. If, on the other hand, one is
always within the region in which the approximation can be regarded as reliable, then both
classical and quantum descriptions should approximate the standard description.
What does 'close to the standard description' exactly mean needs, of course, some further
clarification. In particular one is assuming the existence of the usual Schrödinger representation in which the system has a behavior that is also consistent with observations. If this
is the case, the natural question is: How can we approximate such description from the
polymer picture? Is there a fine enough graph γμ0 that will approximate the system in such
a way that all observations are indistinguishable? Or even better, can we define a procedure,
that involves a refinement of the graph γμ0 such that one recovers the standard picture?
It could also happen that a continuum limit can be defined but does not coincide with
the 'expected one'. But there might be also physical systems for which there is no standard
description, or it just does not make sense. Can in those cases the polymer representation,
if it exists, provide the correct physical description of the system under consideration? For
instance, if there exists a physical limitation to the minimum scale set by μ0 , as could be
the case for a quantum theory of gravity, then the polymer description would provide a
true physical bound on the value of certain quantities, such as p in our example. This
could be the case for loop quantum cosmology, where there is a minimum value for physical
volume (coming from the full theory), and phase space points near the 'singularity' lie at
the region where the approximation induced by the scale μ0 departs from the standard
classical description. If in that case the polymer quantum system is regarded as more
fundamental than the classical system (or its standard Wheeler-De Witt quantization), then
one would interpret this discrepancies in the behavior as a signal of the breakdown of classical
description (or its 'naive' quantization).
In the next section we present a method to remove the regulator μ0 which was introduced
as an intermediate step to construct the dynamics. More precisely, we shall consider the
construction of a continuum limit of the polymer description by means of a renormalization
procedure.
V.

THE CONTINUUM LIMIT

This section has two parts. In the first one we motivate the need for a precise notion of
the continuum limit of the polymeric representation, explaining why the most direct, and
naive approach does not work. In the second part, we shall present the main ideas and
results of the paper [6], where the Hamiltonian and the physical Hilbert space in polymer
quantum mechanics are constructed as a continuum limit of effective theories, following
Wilson's renormalization group ideas. The resulting physical Hilbert space turns out to be
unitarily isomorphic to the ordinary Hs = L2 (R, dq) of the Schrödinger theory.
Before describing the results of [6] we should discuss the precise meaning of reaching a
theory in the continuum. Let us for concreteness consider the B-type representation in the
q-polarization. That is, states are functions of q and the orthonormal basis χμ (q) is given by
characteristic functions with support on q = μ. Let us now suppose we have a Schrödinger
16

state Ψ(q) ∈ Hs = L2 (R, dq). What is the relation between Ψ(q) and a state in Hpoly,x ?
We are also interested in the opposite question, that is, we would like to know if there is a
preferred state in Hs that is approximated by an arbitrary state ψ(q) in Hpoly,x . The first
obvious observation is that a Schödinger state Ψ(q) does not belong to Hpoly,x since it would
have an infinite norm. To see that note that even when the would-be state can be formally
expanded in the χμ basis as,
X
Ψ(q) =
Ψ(μ) χμ (q)
μ

where the sum is over the parameter μ ∈ R. Its associated norm in Hpoly,x would be:
X
|Ψ(q)|2poly =
|Ψ(μ)|2 → ∞
μ

which blows up. Note that in order to define a mapping P : Hs → Hpoly,x , there is a huge
ambiguity since the values of the function Ψ(q) are needed in order to expand the polymer
wave function. Thus we can only define a mapping in a dense subset D of Hs where the
values of the functions are well defined (recall that in Hs the value of functions at a given
point has no meaning since states are equivalence classes of functions). We could for instance
ask that the mapping be defined for representatives of the equivalence classes in Hs that are
piecewise continuous. From now on, when we refer to an element of the space Hs we shall
be refereeing to one of those representatives. Notice then that an element of Hs does define
an element of Cyl∗γ , the dual to the space Cylγ , that is, the space of cylinder functions with
support on the (finite) lattice γ = {μ1 , μ2 , . . . , μN }, in the following way:
Ψ(q) : Cylγ −→ C

such that
Ψ(q)[ψ(q)] = (Ψ|ψi :=

X
μ

Ψ(μ) h χμ |

N
X
i=1

ψi χμi ipolyγ =

N
X
i=1

Ψ(μi) ψi < ∞

Note that this mapping could be seen as consisting
of two parts: First, a projection Pγ :
P
∗
Cyl → Cylγ such that Pγ (Ψ) = Ψγ (q) :=
i Ψ(μi ) χμi (q) ∈ Cylγ . The state Ψγ is
sometimes refereed to as the 'shadow of Ψ(q) on the lattice γ'. The second step is then to
take the inner product between the shadow Ψγ (q) and the state ψ(q) with respect to the
polymer inner product hΨγ |ψipolyγ . Now this inner product is well defined. Notice that for
any given lattice γ the corresponding projector Pγ can be intuitively interpreted as some
kind of 'coarse graining map' from the continuum to the lattice γ. In terms of functions of
q the projection is replacing a continuous function defined on R with a function over the
lattice γ ⊂ R which is a discrete set simply by restricting Ψ to γ. The finer the lattice the
more points that we have on the curve. As we shall see in the second part of this section,
there is indeed a precise notion of coarse graining that implements this intuitive idea in a
concrete fashion. In particular, we shall need to replace the lattice γ with a decomposition
of the real line in intervals (having the lattice points as end points).
Let us now consider a system in the polymer representation in which a particular lattice
γ0 was chosen, say with points of the form {qk ∈ R |qk = ka0 , ∀ k ∈ Z}, namely a uniform
lattice with spacing equal to a0 . In this case, any Schrödinger wave function (of the type
that we consider) will have a unique shadow on the lattice γ0 . If we refine the lattice γ 7→ γn
17

by dividing each interval in 2n new intervals of length an = a0 /2n we have new shadows
that have more and more points on the curve. Intuitively, by refining infinitely the graph we
would recover the original function Ψ(q). Even when at each finite step the corresponding
shadow has a finite norm in the polymer Hilbert space, the norm grows unboundedly and
the limit can not be taken, precisely because we can not embed Hs into Hpoly . Suppose now
that we are interested in the reverse process, namely starting from a polymer theory on a
lattice and asking for the 'continuum wave function' that is best approximated by a wave
function over a graph. Suppose furthermore that we want to consider the limit of the graph
becoming finer. In order to give precise answers to these (and other) questions we need to
introduce some new technology that will allow us to overcome these apparent difficulties. In
the remaining of this section we shall recall these constructions for the benefit of the reader.
Details can be found in [6] (which is an application of the general formalism discussed in
[9]).
The starting point in this construction is the concept of a scale C, which allows us to
define the effective theories and the concept of continuum limit. In our case a scale is a
decomposition of the real line in the union of closed-open intervals, that cover the whole
line and do not intersect. Intuitively, we are shifting the emphasis from the lattice points
to the intervals defined by the same points with the objective of approximating continuous
functions defined on R with functions that are constant on the intervals defined by the
lattice. To be precise, we define an embedding, for each scale Cn from Hpoly to Hs by means
of a step function:
X
X
Ψ(man ) χαm (q) ∈ Hs
Ψ(man ) χman (q) →
m

m

with χαn (q) a characteristic function on the interval αm = [man , (m + 1)an ). Thus, the
shadows (living on the lattice) were just an intermediate step in the construction of the
approximating function; this function is piece-wise constant and can be written as a linear
combination of step functions with the coefficients provided by the shadows.
The challenge now is to define in an appropriate sense how one can approximate all the
aspects of the theory by means of this constant by pieces functions. Then the strategy is
that, for any given scale, one can define an effective theory by approximating the kinetic
operator by a combination of the translation operators that shift between the vertices of the
given decomposition, in other words by a periodic function in p. As a result one has a set of
effective theories at given scales which are mutually related by coarse graining maps. This
framework was developed in [6]. For the convenience of the reader we briefly recall part of
that framework.
Let us denote the kinematic polymer Hilbert space at the scale Cn as HCn , and its
basis elements as eαi ,Cn , where αi = [ian , (i + 1)an ) ∈ Cn . By construction this basis is
orthonormal. The basis elements in the dual Hilbert space HC∗ n are denoted by ωαi ,Cn ;
they are also orthonormal. The states ωαi ,Cn have a simple action on Cyl, ωαi ,Cn (δx0 ,q ) =
χαi ,Cn (x0 ). That is, if x0 is in the interval αi of Cn the result is one and it is zero if it is not
there.
Given any m ≤ n, we define d∗m,n : HC∗ n → HC∗ m as the 'coarse graining' map between
the dual Hilbert spaces, that sends the part of the elements of the dual basis to zero while
keeping the information of the rest: d∗m,n (ωαi ,Cn ) = ωβj ,Cm if i = j2n−m , in the opposite case
d∗m,n (ωαi ,Cn ) = 0.
At every scale the corresponding effective theory is given by the hamiltonian Hn . These
18

Hamiltonians will be treated as quadratic forms, hn : HCn → R, given by
hn (ψ) = λ2Cn (ψ, Hn ψ) ,

(26)

where λ2Cn is a normalizaton factor. We will see later that this rescaling of the inner product is
necessary in order to guarantee the convergence of the renormalized theory. The completely
renormalized theory at this scale is obtained as
⋆
hren
m := lim dm,n hn .
Cn →R

(27)

and the renormalized Hamiltonians are compatible with each other, in the sense that
ren
d⋆m,n hren
n = hm .

In order to analyze the conditions for the convergence in (27) let us express the Hamiltonian
in terms of its eigen-covectors end eigenvalues. We will work with effective Hamiltonians
that have a purely discrete spectrum (labelled by ν) Hn * Ψν,Cn = Eν,Cn Ψν,Cn . We shall also
introduce, as an intermediate step, a cut-off in the energy levels. The origin of this cut-off is
in the approximation of the Hamiltonian of our system at a given scale with a Hamiltonian
of a periodic system in a regime of small energies, as we explained earlier. Thus, we can
write
νcut−off
X
νcut−off
(28)
Eν,Cm Ψν,Cm ⊗ Ψν,Cm ,
hm
=
ν=0

where the eigen covectors Ψν,Cm are normalized according to the inner product rescaled by
1
, and the cut-off can vary up to a scale dependent bound, νcut−off ≤ νmax (Cm ). The
λ2Cn
.
Hilbert space of covectors together with such inner product will be called HC⋆ren
m
In the presence of a cut-off, the convergence of the microscopically corrected Hamiltonians, equation (27) is equivalent to the existence of the following two limits. The first one is
the convergence of the energy levels,
lim Eν,Cn = Eνren .

Cn →R

(29)

Second is the existence of the completely renormalized eigen covectors,
⋆
⋆ren
lim d⋆m,n Ψν,Cn = Ψren
ν,Cm ∈ HCm ⊂ Cyl .

Cn →R

(30)

We clarify that the existence of the above limit means that Ψren
ν,Cm (δx0 ,q ) is well defined for
any δx0 ,q ∈ Cyl. Notice that this point-wise convergence, if it can take place at all, will
require the tuning of the normalization factors λ2Cn .
Now we turn to the question of the continuum limit of the renormalized covectors. First
we can ask for the existence of the limit
lim Ψren
ν,Cn (δx0 ,q )

Cn →R

(31)

for any δx0 ,q ∈ Cyl. When this limits exists there is a natural action of the eigen covectors
in the continuum limit. Below we consider another notion of the continuum limit of the
renormalized eigen covectors.
19

When the completely renormalized eigen covectors exist, they form a collection that is d⋆ ⋆
ren
compatible, d⋆m,n Ψren
ν,Cn = Ψν,Cm . A sequence of d -compatible normalizable covectors define
←−⋆ren

an element of H R , which is the projective limit of the renormalized spaces of covectors
←−

←−⋆ren

⋆ren
H R := lim HCn .
Cn →R

(32)

The inner product in this space is defined by
ren
({ΨCn }, {ΦCn })ren
R := lim (ΨCn , ΦCn )Cn .
Cn →R

←−⋆ren

The natural inclusion of C0∞ in H R P
is by an antilinear map which assigns to any Ψ ∈ C0∞
⋆
shad
⋆ren
the d⋆ -compatible collection Ψshad
Cn :=
αi ωαi Ψ̄(L(αi )) ∈ HCn ⊂ Cyl ; ΨCn will be called
the shadow of Ψ at scale Cn and acts in Cyl as a piecewise constant function. Clearly
←−⋆ren
other types of test functions like Schwartz functions are also naturally included in H R .
In this context a shadow is a state of the effective theory that approximates a state in the
continuum theory.
←−⋆ren
Since the inner product in H R is degenerate, the physical Hilbert space is defined as
←−⋆ren

⋆
Hphys
:= H R

/ ker(*, *)ren
R

⋆⋆
Hphys := Hphys

The nature of the physical Hilbert space, whether it is isomorphic to the Schrödinger
Hilber space, Hs , or not, is determined by the normalization factors λ2Cn which were determined by the conditions asking for compatibility of the dynamics of the effective theories
at different scales. The dynamics of the system under consideration selects the continuum
limit.
Let us now return to the definition of the Hamiltonian in the continuum limit. First
consider the continuum limit of the Hamiltonian (with cut-off) in the sense of its point-wise
convergence as a quadratic form. It turns out that if the limit of equation (31) exists for all
ν
ren
the eigencovectors allowed by the cut-off, we have hRcut−off : Hpoly,x → R defined by
ν

hRcut−off

ren

(δx0 ,q ) := lim hνncut−off ren ([δx0 ,q ]Cn ).
Cn →R

(33)

This Hamiltonian quadratic form in the continuum can be coarse grained to any scale and, as
can be expected, it yields the completely renormalized Hamiltonian quadratic forms at that
scale. However, this is not a completely satisfactory continuum limit because we can not
remove the auxiliary cut-off νcut−off . If we tried, as we include more and more eigencovectors
in the Hamiltonian the calculations done at a given scale would diverge and doing them in
the continuum is just as divergent. Below we explore a more successful path.
We can use the renormalized inner product to induce an action of the cut–off Hamiltonians
←−⋆ren
on H R
ν
ren
hRcut−off ({ΨCn }) := lim hνncut−off ren ((ΨCn , *)ren
Cn ),
Cn →R

where we have used the fact that (ΨCn , *)ren
Cn ∈ HCn . The existence of this limit is trivial
because the renormalized Hamiltonians are finite sums and the limit exists term by term.
20

These cut-off Hamiltonians descend to the physical Hilbert space
ν

hRcut−off

ren

ν

([{ΨCn }]) := hRcut−off

ren

({ΨCn })

⋆
.
for any representative {ΨCn } ∈ [{ΨCn }] ∈ Hphys

←−⋆ren

Finally we can address the issue of removal of the cut-off. The Hamiltonian hren
R :HR →
R is defined by the limit
ν
ren
hren
lim hRcut−off
R :=
νcut−off →∞

when the limit exists. Its corresponding Hermitian form in Hphys is defined whenever the
above limit exists. This concludes our presentation of the main results of [6]. Let us now
consider several examples of systems for which the continuum limit can be investigated.
VI.

EXAMPLES

In this section we shall develop several examples of systems that have been treated with
the polymer quantization. These examples are simple quantum mechanical systems, such
as the simple harmonic oscillator and the free particle, as well as a quantum cosmological
model known as loop quantum cosmology.
A.

The Simple Harmonic Oscillator

In this part, let us consider the example of a Simple Harmonic Oscillator (SHO) with parameters m and ω, classically described by the following Hamiltonian
H=

1 2 1
p + m ω 2 x2 .
2m
2

p
Recall that from these parameters one can define a length scale D =
~/mω. In the
standard treatment one uses this scale to define a complex structure JD (and an inner product
from it), as we have described in detail that uniquely selects the standard Schrödinger
representation.
At scale Cn we have an effective Hamiltonian for the Simple Harmonic Oscillator (SHO)
given by
an p i 1
~2 h
1 − cos
+ m ω 2 x2 .
HCn =
(34)
ma2n
~
2
If we interchange position and momentum, this Hamiltonian is exactly that of a pendulum
of mass m, length l and subject to a constant gravitational field g:
ĤCn = −

~2 d 2
+ mgl(1 − cos θ)
2ml2 dθ2

where those quantities are related to our system by,
l=

~
,
m ω an

g=

~ω
,
m an

θ=

p an
~

That is, we are approximating, for each scale Cn the SHO by a pendulum. There is, however, an important difference. From our knowledge of the pendulum system, we know that
21

the quantum system will have a spectrum for the energy that has two different asymptotic
behaviors, the SHO for low energies and the planar rotor in the higher end, corresponding to
oscillating and rotating solutions respectively2 . As we refine our scale and both the length
of the pendulum and the height of the periodic potential increase, we expect to have an
increasing number of oscillating states (for a given pendulum system, there is only a finite
number of such states). Thus, it is justified to consider the cut-off in the energy eigenvalues, as discussed in the last section, given that we only expect a finite number of states
of the pendulum to approximate SHO eigenstates. With these consideration in mind, the
relevant question is whether the conditions for the continuum limit to exist are satisfied.
This question has been answered in the affirmative in [6]. What was shown there was that
the eigen-values and eigen functions of the discrete systems, which represent a discrete and
non-degenerate set, approximate those of the continuum, namely, of the standard harmonic
oscillator when the inner product is renormalized by a factor λ2Cn = 1/2n . This convergence
implies that the continuum limit exists as we understand it. Let us now consider the simplest possible system, a free particle, that has nevertheless the particular feature that the
spectrum of the energy is continuous.
B.

Free Polymer Particle

In the limit ω → 0, the Hamiltonian of the Simple Harmonic oscillator (34) goes to the
Hamiltonian of a free particle and the corresponding time independent Schrödinger equation,
in the p−polarization, is given by
 2

~
an p
(1 − cos
) − ECn ψ̃(p) = 0
ma2n
~
where we now have that p ∈ S 1 , with p ∈ (− π~
, π~ ). Thus, we have
an an
ECn =

an p 
~2
~2 
1
−
cos
≤
E
≡
2
.
Cn ,max
ma2n
~
ma2n

(35)

At each scale the energy of the particle we can describe is bounded from above and the bound
depends on the scale. Note that in this case the spectrum is continuous, which implies that
the ordinary eigenfunctions of the Hilbert are not normalizable. This imposes an upper
bound in the value that the energy of the particle can have, in addition to the bound in the
momentum due to its "compactification".
Let us first look for eigen-solutions to the time independent Schrödinger equation, that is,
for energy eigenstates. In the case of the ordinary free particle, these correspond to constant
ipx
momentum plane waves of the form e±( ~ ) and such that the ordinary dispersion relation
p2 /2m = E is satisfied. These plane waves are not square integrable and do not belong to
the ordinary Hilbert space of the Schrödinger theory but they are still useful for extracting
information about the system. For the polymer free particle we have,
ψ̃Cn (p) = c1 δ(p − PCn ) + c2 δ(p + PCn )
2

Note that both types of solutions are, in the phase space, closed. This is the reason behind the purely
discrete spectrum. The distinction we are making is between those solutions inside the separatrix, that
we call oscillating, and those that are above it that we call rotating.

22

where PCn is a solution of the previous equation considering a fixed value of ECn . That is,


~
ma2n
PCn = P (ECn ) =
arccos 1 − 2 ECn
an
~
The inverse Fourier transform yields, in the 'x representation',
√
Z π~/an

i an
1
~ 2π
p
j
ψCn (xj ) = √
dp =
c1 eixj PCn /~ + c2 e−ixj PCn /~ .
ψ̃(p) e ~
an
2π −π~/an

(36)

with xj = an j for j ∈ Z. Note that the eigenfunctions are still delta functions (in the
p representation) and thus not (square) normalizable with respect to the polymer inner
product, that in the p polarization is just given by the ordinary Haar measure on S 1 , and
there is no quantization of the momentum (its spectrum is still truly continuous).
Let us now consider the time dependent Schrödinger equation,
i~ ∂t Ψ̃(p, t) = Ĥ * Ψ̃(p, t).
Which now takes the form,
∂
−i ~
Ψ̃(p, t) =
(1 − cos (an p/~)) Ψ̃(p, t)
∂t
m an
that has as its solution,
i~

Ψ̃(p, t) = e− m an (1−cos (an p/~)) t ψ̃(p) = e(−iECn /~) t ψ̃(p)
for any initial function ψ̃(p), where ECn satisfy the dispersion relation (35). The wave
function Ψ(xj , t), the xj -representation of the wave function, can be obtained for any given
time t by Fourier transforming with (36) the wave function Ψ̃(p, t).
In order to check out the convergence of the microscopically corrected Hamiltonians we
should analyze the convergence of the energy levels and of the proper covectors. In the limit
n → ∞, ECn → E = p2 /2m so we can be certain that the eigen-values for the energy converge
⋆ren
(when fixing the value of p). Let us write the proper covector as ΨCn = (ψCn , *)ren
Cn ∈ HCn .
Then we can bring microscopic corrections to scale Cm and look for convergence of such
corrections
.
⋆
Ψren
Cm = lim d(m,n) ΨCn .
n→∞

It is easy to see that given any basis vector eαi ∈ HCm the following limit
Ψren
Cm (eαi ,Cm ) = lim ΨCn (dn,m (eαi ,Cm ))
Cn →∞

exists and is equal to
⋆ Schr
Ψshad
](eαi ,Cm ) = ΨSchr (iam )
Cm (eαi ,Cm ) = [d Ψ

where Ψshad
Cm is calculated using the free particle Hamiltonian in the Schrödinger representation. This expression defines the completely renormalized proper covector at the scale
Cm .
23

C.

Polymer Quantum Cosmology

In this section we shall present a version of quantum cosmology that we call polymer
quantum cosmology. The idea behind this name is that the main input in the quantization
of the corresponding mini-superspace model is the use of a polymer representation as here
understood. Another important input is the choice of fundamental variables to be used and
the definition of the Hamiltonian constraint. Different research groups have made different
choices. We shall take here a simple model that has received much attention recently, namely
a FRW cosmology with k = 0 and coupled to a massless scalar field φ. As we shall see, a
proper treatment of the continuum limit of this system requires new tools under development
that are beyond the scope of this work. We will thus restrict ourselves to the introduction
of the system and the problems that need to be solved.
The system to be quantized corresponds to the phase space of cosmological spacetimes
that are homogeneous and isotropic and for which the homogeneous spatial slices have a flat
intrinsic geometry (k = 0 condition). The only matter content is a mass-less scalar field φ.
In this case the spacetime geometry is given by metrics of the form:
ds2 = −dt2 + a2 (t) (dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 )
where the function a(t) carries all the information and degrees of freedom of the gravity
part. In terms of the coordinates (a, pa , φ, pφ ) for the phase space Γ of the theory, all the
dynamics is captured in the Hamiltonian constraint
p2φ
3 p2a
C := −
+ 8πG
≈0
8 |a|
2|a|3
The first step is to define the constraint on the kinematical Hilbert space to find physical
states and then a physical inner product to construct the physical Hilbert space. First note
that one can rewrite the equation as:
p2φ
3 2 2
pa a = 8πG
8
2
If, as is normally done, one chooses φ to act as an internal time, the right hand side would be
promoted, in the quantum theory, to a second derivative. The left hand side is, furthermore,
symmetric in a and pa . At this point we have the freedom in choosing the variable that will
be quantized and the variable that will not be well defined in the polymer representation.
The standard choice is that pa is not well defined and thus, a and any geometrical quantity
derived from it, is quantized. Furthermore, we have the choice of polarization on the wave
function. In this respect the standard choice is to select the a-polarization, in which a acts as
multiplication and the approximation of pa , namely sin(λ pa )/λ acts as a difference operator
on wave functions of a. For details of this particular choice see [5]. Here we shall adopt this
same polarization, that is, we shall have wave functions Ψ(a, φ).
Just as we did in the previous cases, in order to gain intuition about the behavior of
the polymer quantized theory, it is convenient to look at the equivalent problem in the
classical theory, namely the classical system we would get be approximating the non-well
defined observable (pa in our present case) by a well defined object (made of trigonometric
functions). Let us for simplicity choose to replace pa 7→ sin(λ pa )/λ. With this choice we
24

get an effective classical Hamiltonian constraint that depends on λ:
Cλ := −

p2φ
3 sin(λ pa )2
+
8πG
≈0
8 λ2 |a|
2|a|3

We can now compute effective equations of motion by means of the equations: Ḟ := {F, Cλ },
for any observable F ∈ C ∞ (Γ), and where we are using the effective (first order) action:
Z
Sλ = dτ (pa ȧ + pφ φ̇ − N Cλ )
with the choice N = 1. The first thing to notice is that the quantity pφ is a constant of the
pφ
motion, given that the variable φ is cyclic. The second observation is that φ̇ = 8π G |a|
3 has
the same sign as pφ and never vanishes. Thus φ can be used as a (n internal) time variable.
2
The next observation is that the equation for aȧ , namely the effective Friedman equation,
will have a zero for a non-zero value of a given by
a∗ =

32πG 2 2
λ pφ .
3

This is the value at which there will be bounce if the trajectory started with a large value of
a and was contracting. Note that the 'size' of the universe when the bounce occurs depends
on both the constant pφ (that dictates the matter density) and the value of the lattice size
λ. Here it is important to stress that for any value of pφ (that uniquely fixes the trajectory
in the (a, pa ) plane), there will be a bounce. In the original description in terms of Einstein's
equations (without the approximation that depends on λ), there in no such bounce. If ȧ < 0
initially, it will remain negative and the universe collapses, reaching the singularity in a
finite proper time. What happens within the effective description if we refine the lattice
and go from λ to λn := λ/2n ? The only thing that changes, for the same classical orbit
labelled by pφ , is that the bounce occurs at a 'later time' and for a smaller value of a∗ but
the qualitative picture remains the same.
This is the main difference with the systems considered before. In those cases, one could
have classical trajectories that remained, for a given choice of parameter λ, within the region
where sin(λp)/λ is a good approximation to p. Of course there were also classical trajectories
that were outside this region but we could then refine the lattice and find a new value λ′
for which the new classical trajectory is well approximated. In the case of the polymer
cosmology, this is never the case: Every classical trajectory will pass from a region where
the approximation is good to a region where it is not; this is precisely where the 'quantum
corrections' kick in and the universes bounces.
Given that in the classical description, the 'original' and the 'corrected' descriptions are
so different we expect that, upon quantization, the corresponding quantum theories, namely
the polymeric and the Wheeler-DeWitt will be related in a non-trivial way (if at all).
In this case, with the choice of polarization and for a particular factor ordering we have,
"
#
2
1
∂
32π 2 ∂ 2
sin(λa)
l
* Ψ(a, φ) = 0
+
λ
∂a
3 p ∂φ2
as the Polymer Wheeler-DeWitt equation.
25

In order to approach the problem of the continuum limit of this quantum theory, we
have to realize that the task is now somewhat different than before. This is so given that
the system is now a constrained system with a constraint operator rather than a regular
non-singular system with an ordinary Hamiltonian evolution. Fortunately for the system
under consideration, the fact that the variable φ can be regarded as an internal time allows
us to interpret the quantum constraint as a generalized Klein-Gordon equation of the form
∂2
Ψ = Θλ * Ψ
∂φ2
where the operator Θλ is 'time independent'. This allows us to split the space of solutions
into 'positive and negative frequency', introduce a physical inner product on the positive
frequency solutions of this equation and a set of physical observables in terms of which to
describe the system. That is, one reduces in practice the system to one very similar√to the
∂
Schrödinger case by taking the positive square root of the previous equation: ∂φ
Ψ = Θλ *Ψ.
The question we are interested is whether the continuum limit of these theories (labelled by
λ) exists and whether it corresponds to the Wheeler-DeWitt theory. A complete treatment
of this problem lies, unfortunately, outside the scope of this work and will be reported
elsewhere [12].
VII.

DISCUSSION

Let us summarize our results. In the first part of the article we showed that the polymer
representation of the canonical commutation relations can be obtained as the limiting case
of the ordinary Fock-Schrödinger representation in terms of the algebraic state that defines
the representation. These limiting cases can also be interpreted in terms of the naturally
defined coherent states associated to each representation labelled by the parameter d, when
they become infinitely 'squeezed'. The two possible limits of squeezing lead to two different
polymer descriptions that can nevertheless be identified, as we have also shown, with the
two possible polarizations for an abstract polymer representation. This resulting theory has,
however, very different behavior as the standard one: The Hilbert space is non-separable,
the representation is unitarily inequivalent to the Schrödinger one, and natural operators
such as p̂ are no longer well defined. This particular limiting construction of the polymer
theory can shed some light for more complicated systems such as field theories and gravity.
In the regular treatments of dynamics within the polymer representation, one needs to
introduce some extra structure, such as a lattice on configuration space, to construct a
Hamiltonian and implement the dynamics for the system via a regularization procedure.
How does this resulting theory compare to the original continuum theory one had from the
beginning? Can one hope to remove the regulator in the polymer description? As they stand
there is no direct relation or mapping from the polymer to a continuum theory (in case there
is one defined). As we have shown, one can indeed construct in a systematic fashion such
relation by means of some appropriate notions related to the definition of a scale, closely
related to the lattice one had to introduce in the regularization. With this important shift in
perspective, and an appropriate renormalization of the polymer inner product at each scale
one can, subject to some consistency conditions, define a procedure to remove the regulator,
and arrive to a Hamiltonian and a Hilbert space.
As we have seen, for some simple examples such as a free particle and the harmonic
oscillator one indeed recovers the Schrödinger description back. For other systems, such
26

as quantum cosmological models, the answer is not as clear, since the structure of the
space of classical solutions is such that the 'effective description' introduced by the polymer
regularization at different scales is qualitatively different from the original dynamics. A
proper treatment of these class of systems is underway and will be reported elsewhere [12].
Perhaps the most important lesson that we have learned here is that there indeed exists a
rich interplay between the polymer description and the ordinary Schrödinger representation.
The full structure of such relation still needs to be unravelled. We can only hope that a
full understanding of these issues will shed some light in the ultimate goal of treating the
quantum dynamics of background independent field systems such as general relativity.
Acknowledgments

We thank A. Ashtekar, G. Hossain, T. Pawlowski and P. Singh for discussions. This work
was in part supported by CONACyT U47857-F and 40035-F grants, by NSF PHY04-56913,
by the Eberly Research Funds of Penn State, by the AMC-FUMEC exchange program and
by funds of the CIC-Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo.

[1] Halvorson H 2004 Complementarity of Representations in quantum mechanics Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 35 45
[2] Ashtekar A, Fairhurst S and Willis J L 2003 Quantum gravity, shadow states, and quantum
mechanics Class. Quant. Grav. 20 1031 [arXiv:gr-qc/0207106].
[3] Fredenhagen K and Reszewski F 2006 Polymer state approximations of Schrödinger wave
functions Class. Quant. Grav. 23 6577 [arXiv:gr-qc/0606090].
[4] Bojowald M 2005 Loop quantum cosmology Living Rev. Rel. 8, 11 [arXiv:gr-qc/0601085];
Ashtekar A, Bojowald M and Lewandowski L 2003 Mathematical structure of loop quantum
cosmology Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 7 233 [arXiv:gr-qc/0304074]; Ashtekar A, Pawlowski T
and Singh P 2006 Quantum nature of the big bang: Improved dynamics Phys. Rev. D 74
084003 [arXiv:gr-qc/0607039]
[5] Husain V and Winkler O 2007 Semiclassical states for quantum cosmology Phys. Rev. D 75
024014 [arXiv:gr-qc/0607097]; Husain V and Winkler O 2004 On singularity resolution in
quantum gravity Phys. Rev. D 69 084016 [arXiv:gr-qc/0312094].
[6] Corichi A, Vukasinac T and Zapata J A 2007 Hamiltonian and physical Hilbert space in
polymer quantum mechanics Class. Quant. Grav. 24 1495 [arXiv:gr-qc/0610072]
[7] Corichi A and Cortez J 2007 Canonical quantization from an algebraic perspective (preprint)
[8] Corichi A, Cortez J and Quevedo H 2004 Schrödinger and Fock Representations for a Field
Theory on Curved Spacetime Annals Phys. 313 446 [arXiv:hep-th/0202070].
[9] Manrique E, Oeckl R, Weber A and Zapata J A 2006 Loop quantization as a continuum limit
Class. Quant. Grav. 23 3393 [arXiv:hep-th/0511222]; Manrique E, Oeckl R, Weber A and
Zapata J A 2006 Effective theories and continuum limit for canonical loop quantization (in
preparation)
[10] Chiou D W 2006 Galileo symmetries in polymer particle representation [arXiv:gr-qc/0612155].
[11] Rudin W 1962 Fourier analysis on groups, (Interscience, New York)

27

[12] Ashtekar A, Corichi A, Singh P, 2007 Loop Quantum Cosmology and its continuum limit
(preprint); Corichi A, Vukasinac T and Zapata JA, 2007 Continuum limit for quantum constrained system (preprint).

28

