arXiv:0704.0008v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 31 Mar 2007

Numerical solution of shock and ramp
compression for general material properties
Damian C. Swift
Group P-24, Physics Division,
Mail Stop E526, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
Los Alamos, NM 87545, U.S.A.

Abstract
A general formulation was developed to represent material models for applications
in dynamic loading. Numerical methods were devised to calculate response to shock
and ramp compression, and ramp decompression, generalizing previous solutions
for scalar equations of state. The numerical methods were found to be flexible and
robust, and matched analytic results to a high accuracy. The basic ramp and shock
solution methods were coupled to solve for composite deformation paths, such as
shock-induced impacts, and shock interactions with a planar interface between different materials. These calculations capture much of the physics of typical material
dynamics experiments, without requiring spatially-resolving simulations. Example
calculations were made of loading histories in Be and Mo, illustrating the effects
of plastic work on the temperatures induced in quasi-isentropic and shock-release
experiments.
Key words: material dynamics, shock, isentrope, adiabat, numerical solution,
constitutive behavior
PACS: 62.50.+p, 47.40.-x, 62.20.-x, 46.35.+z

1

Introduction

The continuum representation of matter is widely used for material dynamics
in science and engineering. Spatially-resolved continuum dynamics simulations
are the most widespread and familiar, solving the initial value problem by discretizing the spatial domain and integrating the dynamical equations forward
in time to predict the motion and deformation of components of the system.
Email address: dswift@lanl.gov (Damian C. Swift).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

March 7, 2007 – LA-UR-07-2051

This type of simulation is used, for instance, to study hypervelocity impact
problems such as the vulnerability of armor to projectiles [1,2], the performance of satellite debris shields [3], and the impact of meteorites with planets, notably the formation of the moon [4]. The problem can be divided into
the dynamical equations of the continuum, the state field of the components
s(~r), and the inherent properties of the materials. Given the local material
state s, the material properties allow the stress τ to be determined. Given the
stress field τ (~r) and mass density field ρ(~r), the dynamical equations describe
the fields of acceleration, compression, and thermodynamic work done on the
materials.
The equations of continuum dynamics describe the behavior of a dynamically deforming system of arbitrary complexity. Particular, simpler deformation paths can be described more compactly by different sets of equations,
and solved by different techniques than those used for continuum dynamics
in general. Simpler deformation paths occur often in experiments designed
to develop and calibrate models of material properties. These paths can be
regarded as different ways of interrogating the material properties. The principal examples in material dynamics are shock and ramp compression. Typical
experiments are designed to induce such loading histories and measure or infer the properties of the material in these states before they are destroyed by
reflected waves.
The development of the field of material dynamics was driven by applications
in the physics of hypervelocity impact and high explosive systems, including
nuclear weapons [5]. In the regimes of interest, typically components with
dimensions ranging from millimeters to meters and pressures from 1 GPa to
1 TPa, material behavior is dominated by the scalar equation of state (EOS):
the relationship between pressure, compression (or mass density), and internal energy. Other components of stress (specifically shear stresses) are much
smaller, and chemical explosives react promptly so can be treated by simple
models of complete detonation. EOS were developed as fits to experimental data, particularly to series of shock states and to isothermal compression
measurements [6]. It is relatively straightforward to construct shock and ramp
compression states from an EOS algebraically or numerically depending on
the EOS, and to fit an EOS to these measurements. More recently, applications and scientific interest have grown to include a wider range of pressures
and time scales, such as laser-driven inertial confinement fusion [7], and experiments are designed to measure other aspects than the EOS, such as the
kinetics of phase changes, constitutive behavior describing shear stresses, incomplete chemical reactions, and the effects of microstructure such as grain
orientation and porosity. Theoretical techniques have also evolved to predict
the EOS with ∼1% accuracy [8] and elastic contributions to shear stress with
slightly poorer accuracy [9].
2

In this paper, a general convention for representing material states is described,
and numerical methods are reported for calculating shock and ramp compression states from general representations of material properties.

2

Conceptual structure for material properties

The desired structure for the description of the material state and properties
under dynamic loading was developed to be as general as possible with respect
to the types of material or models to be represented in the same framework,
and designed from the greatest amount of commonality between spatiallyresolved simulations and calculations of shock and ramp compressions.
In condensed matter on sub-microsecond time scales, heat conduction is often
too slow to have a significant effect on the response of the material, and
is ignored here. The equations of non-relativistic continuum dynamics are,
in Lagrangian form i.e. along characteristics moving with the local material
velocity ~u(~r),
Dρ(~r, t)
= −ρ(~r, t)div ~u(~r, t)
Dt
1
D~u(~r, t)
=−
div τ (~r, t)
Dt
ρ(~r, t)
De(~r, t)
= −||τ (~r, t)grad ~u(~r, t)||
Dt

(1)
(2)
(3)

where ρ is the mass density and e the specific internal energy. Changes in e
can be related to changes in the temperature T through the heat capacity.
The inherent properties of each material in the problem are described by
its constitutive relation or equation of state τ (s). As well as experiencing
compression and work from mechanical deformation, the local material state
s(~r, t) can evolve through internal processes such as plastic flow. In general,
Ds(~r, t)
≡ ṡ[s(~r, t), U(~r, t)]
Dt

:

U ≡ grad ~u(~r, t)

(4)

which can also include the equations for ∂ρ/∂t and ∂e/∂t. Thus the material properties must describe at a minimum τ (s) and ṡ[s(~r, t), U(~r, t)] for each
material. If they also describe T (s), the conductivity, and ṡ(ė), then heat
conduction can be treated. Other functions may be needed for particular numerical methods in continuum dynamics, such as the need for wave speeds
(e.g. the longitudinal sound speed), which are needed for time step control in
explicit time integration. Internally, within the material properties models, it
3

is desirable to re-use software as much as possible, and other functions of the
state are therefore desirable to allow models to be constructed in a modular
and hierarchical way. Inevitably, arithmetic manipulations must be performed
on the state, which can be encoded neatly using operator overloading. For
instance, if ṡ is calculated in a forward-time numerical method then changes
of state are calculated using numerical evolution equations such as
s(t + δt) = s(t) + δtṡ.

(5)

Thus for a general state s, it is necessary to multiply it by a real number
and to add two states together. For a specific software implementation, other
operations may be needed, for example to create, copy, or destroy a new
instance of a state.
A very wide range of types of material behavior can be represented with this
formalism. At the highest level, different types of behavior are characterized
by different structures for the state s (Table 1. For each type of state, different
specific models can be defined, such as perfect gas and Grüneisen EOS. For
each specific model, different materials are represented by choosing different
values for the parameters in the model, and different local material states are
represented through different values for the components of s. In the jargon
object-oriented programming, this is polymorphism. States or models may
be defined by extending or combining other states or models – this can be
implemented using the object-oriented programming concept of inheritance.
Trial implementations have been made as libraries in the C++ and Java programming languages. The external interface to the material properties was
general at the level of representing a generic material type and state. The
type of state and model were then selected when programs using the material
properties library were run. In C++, objects which were polymorphic at run
time had to be represented as pointers, requiring additional software constructions to allocate and free up physical memory associated with each object. It
was possible to include general re-usable functions as polymorphic objects
when defining models: real functions of one real parameter could be polynomials, transcendentals, tabular with different interpolation schemes, piecewise
definitions over different regions of the one dimensional line, sums, products,
etc; again defined specifically at run time. Object-oriented polymorphism and
inheritance were thus very powerful techniques for increasing software re-use,
making the software more compact and more reliable through the possibility
of using functions which had already been tested.
Given conceptual and software structures designed to represent general material properties suitable for use in spatially-resolved continuum dynamics
simulations, we now consider the use of these generic material models for
calculating ramp and shock compression.
4

Table 1
Examples of types of material model, distinguished by different structures in the
state vector.
model
state vector effect of mechanical strain
s

ṡm (s, gradu)

equation of state

ρ, e

−ρdiv~u, −pdiv~u/ρ

complete equation of state

ρ, T

−ρdiv~u, −pdiv~u/ρcv

heterogeneous mixture

{ρ, e, fv }i

{−ρdiv~u, −pdiv~u/ρ, 0}i

{−ρdiv~u, −pdiv~u/ρcv , 0 i
−pdivu
~ +fp ||σǫ̇p ||
traditional deviatoric strength ρ, e, σ, ǫ̃p
−ρdiv~u,
, Gǫ̇e ,
ρ
q
fǫ ||ǫ̇2p ||
The symbols are ρ: mass density; e: specific internal energy, T : temperature, fv :
volume fraction, fm : mass fraction, σ: stress deviator, fp : fraction of plastic work
converted to heat, gradup : plastic part of velocity gradient, G: shear modulus, ǫ̇e,p:
elastic and plastic parts of strain rate deviator, ǫ̃p : scalar equivalent plastic strain, fǫ :
factor in effective strain magnitude. Reacting solid explosives can be represented as
heterogeneous mixtures, one component being the reacted products; reaction, a process of internal evolution, transfers material from unreacted to reacted components.
Gas-phase reaction can be represented as a homogeneous mixture, reactions transferring mass between components representing different types of molecule. Symmetric tensors such as the stress deviator are represented more compactly by their 6
unique upper triangular components, e.g. using Voigt notation.
homogeneous mixture

3

ρ, T, {fm }i

Ramp compression

Ramp compression is taken here to mean compression or decompression. If
the material is represented by a scalar EOS, i.e. ignoring any effects of plastic
flow, ramp compression follows an isentrope. This is no longer true when
dissipative processes such as plastic heating occur. The term 'quasi-isentropic'
is sometimes used in this context, particularly for shockless compression; here
we prefer to refer to the thermodynamic trajectories as adiabats since this is
a more appropriate term: no heat is exchanged with the surroundings on the
time scales of interest.
For adiabatic compression, the state evolves according to the second law of
thermodynamics,
de = −p dv

(6)

i.e.
ė = −p v̇ = −

pdiv~u
,
ρ

(7)

5

of for a more general material whose stress tensor is more complicated than a
scalar pressure,
e = τn dv

⇒

ė =

τn div~u
ρ

(8)

where τn is the component of stress normal to the direction of deformation.
The velocity gradient was expressed through a compression factor η ≡ ρ′ /rho
and a strain rate ǫ̇. In all ramp experiments used in the development and calibration of accurate material models, the strain has been applied uniaxially.
More general strain paths, for instance isotropic or including a shear component, can be treated by the same formalism, and that the heating rate would
then be a full inner product of the stress and strain tensors.
The acceleration or deceleration of the material normal to the wave as it is
compressed or expanded adiabatically is
s

Du
∂τn
=− −
,
Dv
∂v

(9)

from which it can be deduced that
Du
cl
=
Dρ
ρ

(10)

where cl is the longitudinal wave speed.
As with continuum dynamics, internal evolution of the material state can
be calculated simultaneously with the continuum equations, or operator split
and calculated periodically at constant compression. The results are the same
to second order in the compression increment. Operator-splitting is desirable
when internal evolution can produce highly nonlinear changes, such as reaction
from solid to gas: rapid changes in state and properties can make numerical
schemes unstable. Operator-splitting is also desirable when the integration
time step for internal evolution is much shorter than the continuum dynamics
time step. Neither of these considerations is very important for ramp compression without spatial resolution, but operator-splitting was used as an option in
the ramp compression calculations for consistency with continuum dynamics
simulations.
The ramp compression equations were integrated using forward-time RungeKutta numerical schemes of second order. The fourth order scheme is a trivial
extension. The sequence of operations to calculate an increment of ramp compression is as follows:
6

(1) Time increment:
δt = −

| ln η|
ǫ̇

(11)

(2) Predictor:
s(t + δt/2) = s(t) +

δt
ṡm (s(t), ǫ̇)
2

(12)

(3) Corrector:
s(t + δt) = s(t) + δtṡm (s(t + δt/2), ǫ̇)

(13)

(4) Internal evolution:
s(t + δt) → s(t + δt) +

t+δt
Z

ṡi (s(t′ ), ǫ̇) dt′

(14)

t

where ṡm is the model-dependent state evolution from applied strain, and ṡi
is internal evolution at constant compression.
The independent variable for integration is specific volume v or mass density
ρ; for numerical integration finite steps are taken in ρ and v. The step size
∆ρ can be controlled so that the numerical error during integration remains
within chosen limits. A tabular adiabat can be calculated by integrating over a
range of v or ρ, but when simulating experimental scenarios the upper limit for
integration is usually that one of the other thermodynamic quantities reaches
a certain value, for example that the normal component of stress reaches
zero, which is the case on release from a high pressure state at a free surface.
Specific stop conditions were found by monitoring the quantity of interest until
bracketed by a finite integration step, then bisecting until the stop condition
was satisfied to a chosen accuracy. During bisection, each trial calculation was
performed as an integration from the first side of the bracket by the trial
compression.

4

Shock compression

Shock compression is the solution of a Riemann problem for the dynamics
of a jump in compression moving with constant speed and with a constant
thickness. The Rankine-Hugoniot (RH) equations [10] describing the shock
compression of matter are derived in the continuum approximation, where
the shock is a formal discontinuity in the continuum fields. In reality, matter
is composed of atoms, and shocks have a finite width governed by the kinetics
7

of dissipative processes – at a fundamental level, matter does not distinguish
between shock compression and ramp compression with a high strain rate –
but the RH equations apply as long as the width of the region of matter where
unresolved processes occur is constant. Compared with the isentropic states
induced by ramp compression in a material represented by an EOS, a shock
always increases the entropy and hence the temperature. With dissipative
processes included, the distinction between a ramp and a shock may become
blurred.
The RH equations express the conservation of mass, momentum, and energy
across a moving discontinuity in state. They are usually expressed in terms of
the pressure, but are readily generalized for materials supporting shear stresses
by using the component of stress normal to the shock (i.e., parallel with the
direction of propagation of the shock), τn :
u2s = −v02

τn − τn0
,
v0 − v

(15)

q

−(τn − τn0 )(v0 − v),
1
e = e0 − (τn + τn0 )(v0 − v),
2

∆up =

(16)
(17)

where us is the speed of the shock wave with respect to the material, ∆up is
the change in material speed normal to the shock wave (i.e., parallel to its
direction of propagation), and subscript 0 refers to the initial state.
The RH relations can be applied to general material models if a time scale
or strain rate is imposed, and an orientation chosen for the material with
respect to the shock. Shock compression in continuum dynamics is almost
always uniaxial.
The RH equations involve only the initial and final states in the material. If a
material has properties that depend on the deformation path – such as plastic flow or viscosity – then physically the detailed shock structure may make
a difference [13]. This is a limitation of discontinuous shocks in continuum
dynamics: it may be addressed as discussed above by including dissipative
processes and considering ramp compression, if the dissipative processes can
be represented adequately in the continuum approximation. Spatially-resolved
simulations with numerical differentiation to obtain spatial derivatives and forward time differencing are usually not capable of representing shock discontinuities directly, and an artificial viscosity is used to smear shock compression
over a few spatial cells [14]. The trajectory followed by the material in thermodynamic space is a smooth adiabat with dissipative heating supplied by
the artificial viscosity. If plastic work is also included during this adiabatic
compression, the overall heating for a given compression is greater than from
the RH equations. To be consistent, plastic flow should be neglected while
8

the artificial viscosity is non-zero. This localized disabling of physical processes, particularly time-dependent ones, during the passage of the unphysically smeared shock was previously found necessary for numerically stable
simulations of detonation waves by reactive flow [15].
Detonation waves are reactive shock waves. Steady planar detonation (the
Chapman-Jouguet state [16]) may be calculated using the RH relations, by
imposing the condition that the material state behind the shock is fully reacted.
Several numerical methods have been used to solve the RH equations for
materials represented by an EOS only [11,12]. The general RH equations may
be solved numerically for a given shock compression ∆ρ by varying the specific
internal energy e until the normal stress from the material model equals that
from the RH energy equation, Eq. 17. The shock and particle speeds are
then calculated from Eqs 15 and 16. This numerical method is particularly
convenient for EOS of the form p(ρ, e), as e may be varied directly. Solutions
may still be found for general material models using ṡ(ė), by which the energy
may be varied until the solution is found.
Numerically, the solution was found by bracketing and bisection:
(1) For given compression ∆ρ, take the low-energy end for bracketing as a
nearby state s− (e.g. the previous state, of lower compression, on the
Hugoniot), compressed adiabatically (to state s̃), and cooled so the specific internal energy is e(s− ).
(2) Bracket the desired state: apply successively larger heating increments
∆e to s̃, evolving each trial state internally, until τn (s) from the material
model exceeds τn (e − e0 ) from Eq. 17.
(3) Bisect in ∆e, evolving each trial state internally, until τn (s) equals τn (e −
e0 ) to the desired accuracy.
As with ramp compression, the independent variable for solution was mass
density ρ, and finite steps ∆ρ were taken. Each shock state was calculated
independently of the rest, so numerical errors did not accumulate along the
shock Hugoniot. The accuracy of the solution was independent of ∆ρ. A tabular Hugoniot can be calculated by solving over a range of ρ, but again when
simulating experimental scenarios it is usually more useful to calculate the
shock state where one of the other thermodynamic quantities reaches a certain value, often that up and τn match the values from another, simultaneous
shock calculation for another material – the situation in impact and shock
transmission problems, discussed below. Specific stop conditions were found
by monitoring the quantity of interest until bracketed by a finite solution step,
then bisecting until the stop condition was satisfied to a chosen accuracy. During bisection, each trial calculation was performed as a shock from the initial
9

conditions to the trial shock compression.

5

Composite loading paths

Given methods to calculate shock and adiabatic loading paths from arbitrary
initial states, a considerable variety of experimental scenarios can be treated
from the interaction of loading or unloading waves with interfaces between different materials, in planar geometry for uniaxial compression. The key physical
constraint is that, if two dissimilar materials are to remain in contact after an
interaction such as an impact or the passage of a shock, the normal stress τn
and particle speed up in both materials must be equal on either side of the
interface. The change in particle speed and stress normal to the waves were
calculated above for compression waves running in the direction of increasing
spatial ordinate (left to right). Across an interface, the sense is reversed for
the material at the left. Thus a projectile impacting a stationary target to the
right is decelerated from its initial speed by the shock induced by impact.
The general problem at an interface can be analyzed by considering the
states at the instant of first contact – on impact, or when a shock traveling through a sandwich of materials first reaches the interface. The initial
states are {ul , sl ; ur , sr }. The final states are {uj , s′l ; uj , rr′ } where uj is the
joint particle speed, τn (s′l ) = τn (s′r ), and s′i is connected to si by either a shock
or an adiabat, starting at the appropriate initial velocity and stress, and with
orientation given by the side of the system each material occurs on. Each type
of wave is considered in turn, looking for an intersection in the up − τn plane.
Examples of these wave interactions are the impact of a projectile with a stationary target (Fig. 1), release of a shock state at a free surface or a material
(e.g. a window) of lower shock impedance (hence reflecting a release wave
into the shocked material – Fig. 2), reshocking at a surface with a material of
higher shock impedance (Fig. 2), or tension induced as materials try to separate in opposite directions when joined by a bonded interface (Fig. 3). Each of
these scenarios may occur in turn following the impact of a projectile with a
target: if the target is layered then a shock is transmitted across each interface
with a release or a reshock reflected back, depending on the materials; release
ultimately occurs at the rear of the projectile and the far end of the target,
and the oppositely-moving release waves subject the projectile and target to
tensile stresses when they interact (Fig. 4).
An extension of this analysis can be used to calculate the interaction of oblique
shocks with an interface [17].
10

principal
Hugoniot
of projectile

principal Hugoniot
of target

normal stress

shock state:
intersection
initial state
of projectile
initial state
of target

0

particle speed

Fig. 1. Wave interactions for the impact of a flat projectile moving from left to right
with a stationary target. Dashed arrows are a guide to the sequence of states. For a
projectile moving from right to left, the construction is the mirror image reflected
in the normal stress axis.

normal stress

secondary
Hugoniot
of target

0

principal Hugoniot:
high impedance window
initial shock state
in target

low impedance
window

window
release
states

target release isentrope

particle speed
target release at free surface

Fig. 2. Wave interactions for the release of a shocked state (shock moving from left
to right) into a stationary 'window' material to its right. The release state depends
whether the window has a higher or lower shock impedance than the shocked material. Dashed arrows are a guide to the sequence of states. For a shock moving from
right to left, the construction is the mirror image reflected in the normal stress axis.

6

Preferred representation of isotropic strength

There is an inconsistency in the standard continuum dynamics treatment of
scalar (pressure) and tensor (stress) response. The scalar EOS expresses the
pressure p(ρ, e) as the dependent quantity, which is the most convenient form
11

normal stress

initial shock state
in projectile and target

target release

projectile release
0

particle speed

projectile release

target release

final tensile state
in projectile and target

Fig. 3. Wave interactions for the release of a shocked state by tension induced as
materials try to separate in opposite directions when joined by a bonded interface.
Material damage, spall, and separation are neglected: the construction shows the
maximum tensile stress possible. For general material properties, e.g. if plastic flow
is included, the state of maximum tensile stress is not just the negative of the initial
shock state. Dashed arrows are a guide to the sequence of states. The graph shows
the initial state after an impact by a projectile moving from right to left; for a
shock moving from right to left, the construction is the mirror image reflected in
the normal stress axis.

for use in the continuum equations. Standard practice is to use sub-Hookean
elasticity (hypoelastic form) [18] described above, in which the state parameters include the stress deviator σ, evolved by integration
σ̇ = G(s)ǫ̇

(18)

where G is the shear modulus and ǫ̇ the strain rate deviator. Thus the isotropic
and deviatoric contributions to stress are not treated in an equivalent way:
the pressure is calculated from a local state involving a strain-like parameter
(mass density), whereas the stress deviator evolves with the time-derivative
of strain. This inconsistency causes problems along complicated loading paths
because G varies strongly with compression: if a material is subjected to a
12

time

111
000
0000
0001111
111
0000
1111
0001111
111
0000
0001111
111
0000
000
111
0000
0001111
111
0000
1111
0001111
111
0000
0001111
111
0000
0001111
111
0000
000
111
0000
0001111
111
0000
1111
0001111
111
0000
0001111
111
0000

window

projectile

target

impact shocks
transmitted shock;
reflected wave
free surface
release
release interactions:
tension

Fig. 4. Schematic of uniaxial wave interactions induced by the impact of a flat
projectile with a composite target.

shear strain ǫ, then isotropic compression (increases the shear modulus from
G to G′ , leaves ǫ unchanged), then shear unloading to isotropic stress, the
true unloading strain is −ǫ, whereas the hypoelastic calculation would require
a strain of −ǫG/G′ .
The stress can be considered as a direct response of the material to the instantaneous state of elastic strain: σ(ǫ, T ). This relation can be predicted directly
with electronic structure calculations of the stress tensor in a solid for a given
compression and elastic strain state [9], and is a direct generalization of the
scalar equation of state. A more consistent representation of the state parameters is to use the strain deviator ǫ rather than σ, and to calculate σ from
scratch when required using
σ = G(s)ǫ

(19)

– a hyperelastic formulation. The state parameters are then {ρ, e, ǫ, ǫ̃p }.
The different formulations give different answers when deviatoric strain is
accumulated at different compressions, in which case the hyperelastic formulation is correct. If the shear modulus varies with strain deviator – i.e., for
nonlinear elasticity – then the definition of G(ǫ) must be adjusted to give the
same stress for a given strain.
13

Many isotropic strength models use scalar measures of the strain and stress
to parameterize work hardening and to apply a yield model of flow stress:
ǫ̃ =

q

fǫ ||ǫ2 ||,

σ̃ =

q

fσ ||σ 2||.

(20)

Inconsistent conventions for equivalent scalar measures have been used by
different workers. In the present work, the common shock physics convention
was used that the flow stress component of τn is 23 Y where Y is the flow stress.
For consistency with published speeds and amplitudes for elastic waves, fǫ =
fσ = 32 , in contrast to other values previously used for lower-rate deformation
[19]. In principle, the values of fǫ and fσ do not matter as long as the strength
parameters were calibrated using the same values then used in any simulations.

7

Examples

In this section, the numerical methods described above are applied to example
materials, demonstrating the effects of strength and chemical reaction on the
loading paths. The materials chosen were air represented by a perfect gas EOS,
the elemental metals Be and Mo. The perfect gas case tests the numerical
schemes against analytic results. Be has been shown to exhibit relatively high
flow stresses for deformation on the nanosecond time scales of interest for
its application as the fuel capsule and ablator in inertial confinement fusion
[20]. Mo is interesting as experimental measurements suggest that its shock
temperature is significantly greater than expected using the EOS only [21].

7.1 Air

Air was chosen as an example of matter represented by the scalar EOS only,
taken here to be the perfect gas EOS,
p = (γ − 1)ρe,

(21)

with γ = 1.4. Air at standard temperature and pressure has approximately
ρ = 10−3 g/cm3 and e = 0.25 MJ/kg. Isentropes for the perfect gas EOS have
the form
pρ−γ

constant,

(22)
14

0.01

pressure (GPa)

Hugoniot

0.001

isentrope

0.0001
0.001

0.01
3

mass density (g/cm )

pressure difference (%)

1
Hugoniot
0.1

0.01

0.001

isentrope

0.0001
0.001

0.01
3

mass density (g/cm )

Fig. 5. Principal isentrope and shock Hugoniot for air (perfect gas): numerical calculations for general material models, compared with analytic results.

and shock Hugoniots have the form

p = (γ − 1)

2e0 ρ0 ρ + p0 (ρ − ρ0 )
.
(γ + 1)ρ0 − (γ − 1)ρ

(23)

The numerical methods above reproduced the principal isentrope and Hugoniot to 10−3% and 0.1% respectively, for a compression increment of 1% along
the isentrope and a solution tolerance of 10−6 GPa for each shock state (Fig. 5).
Over most of the range, the error in the Hugoniot was 0.02% or less, only approaching 0.1% near the maximum shock compression.
15

7.2 Complete equation of state for metals
Empirical EOS for Be and Mo have been published [22] that were fitted
to shock data acquired from microsecond scale impact experiments. This
Grüneisen EOS had the form p(ρ, e), so the temperature T was not directly
available. Temperatures were calculated by reference to a compression curve
along which the temperature and specific internal energy were known, {Tr , er }(ρ),
and using a specific heat capacity defined as a function of density cv (ρ) (constant in practice). The reference curve chosen was the zero kelvin isotherm
('cold curve'), Tr = 0 K. This was calculated from the principal isentrope
e(ρ)|s0 using the estimated density variation of Grüneisen parameter:
a(1−ρ0 /ρ)

er (ρ) = e(ρ)|s0 − T0 cp e

ρ
ρ0

!γ0 −a

.

(24)

In the calculations, this augmented EOS was represented as a 'mechanicalthermal' form comprising any p(ρ, e) EOS plus the reference curves – an example of inheritance and polymorphism.
Empirical EOS are calibrated using experimental data. Shock and adiabatic
compression measurements on strong materials inevitably include elastic-plastic
contributions as well as the scalar EOS itself. If the elastic-plastic contributions
are not taken into account self-consistently, the EOS may implicitly include
contributions from the strength. A unique scalar EOS can be constructed to
reproduce the normal stress as a function of compression for any unique loading path: shock or adiabat, for a constant or smoothly-varying strain rate.
Such as EOS would not generally predict the normal stress for other loading histories. The Grüneisen EOS and Steinberg-Guinan strength model for
the materials discussed below were constructed self-consistently from shock
data – this does not mean the models are accurate for other loading paths, as
neither the EOS nor the strength model includes all the physical terms that
real materials exhibit. This does not in any case matter for the purposes of
demonstrating the properties of the numerical schemes.
7.3 Beryllium
The flow stress measured from laser-driven shock experiments on Be crystals
a few tens of micrometers thick is, at around 5-9 GPa, much greater than the
0.3-1.3 GPa measured on microsecond time scales. A time-dependent crystal
plasticity model for Be is being developed, and the behavior under dynamic
loading depends on the detailed time dependence of plasticity. Calculations
were performed with the Steinberg-Guinan strength model developed for mi16

normal stress (GPa)

90
80

each pair of lines:

70

upper is Hugoniot,

60

lower is adiabat

50
40
30
20
10
0
0.7

0.75

0.8
0.85
0.9
volume compression

0.95

1

Fig. 6. Principal adiabat and shock Hugoniot for Be in normal stress-compression
space, neglecting strength (dashed), for Steinberg-Guinan strength (solid), and for
elastic-perfectly plastic with Y = 10 GPa (dotted).

crosecond scale data [22], and, for the purposes of rough comparison, with
elastic-perfectly plastic response with a flow stress of 10 GPa. The elasticperfectly plastic model neglected pressure and work hardening.
Calculations were made of the principal adiabat and shock Hugoniot, and of
a release adiabat from a state on the principal Hugoniot. Calculations were
made with and without strength. Considering the state trajectories in stressvolume space, it is interesting to note that heating from plastic flow may push
the adiabat above the Hugoniot, because of the greater heating obtained by
integrating along the adiabat compared with jumping from the initial to the
final state on the Hugoniot (Fig. 6). Even with an elastic-perfectly plastic
strength model, the with-strength curves do not lie exactly 23 Y above the
strengthless curves, because heating from plastic flow contributes an increasing
amount of internal energy to the EOS as compression increases.
An important characteristic for the seeding of instabilities by microstructural
variations in shock response is the shock stress at which an elastic wave does
not run ahead of the shock. In Be with the high flow stress of nanosecond
response, the relation between shock and particle speeds is significantly different from the relation for low flow stress (Fig. 7). For low flow stress, the
elastic wave travels at 13.2 km/s. A plastic shock travels faster than this for
pressures greater than 110 GPa, independent of the constitutive model. The
speed of a plastic shock following the initial elastic wave is similar to the low
strength case, because the material is already at its flow stress, but the speed
of a single plastic shock is appreciably higher.
For compression to a given normal stress, the temperature is significantly
17

15

shock speed (km/s)

14
13

elastic wave

12

plastic shock

11
10
9
8
0

20

40

60
80
100
normal stress (GPa)

120

140

Fig. 7. Principal adiabat and shock Hugoniot for Be in shock speed-normal stress
space, neglecting strength (dashed), for Steinberg-Guinan strength (solid), and for
elastic-perfectly plastic with Y = 10 GPa (dotted).

higher with plastic flow included. The additional heating is particularly striking on the principal adiabat: the temperature departs significantly from the
principal isentrope. Thus ramp-wave compression of strong materials may lead
to significant levels of heating, contrary to common assumptions of small temperature increases [23]. Plastic flow is largely irreversible, so heating occurs
on unloading as well as loading. Thus, on adiabatic release from a shockcompressed state, additional heating occurs compared with the no-strength
case. These levels of heating are important as shock or release melting may
occur at a significantly lower shock pressure than would be expected ignoring
the effect of strength. (Fig. 8.)

7.4 Molybdenum

Experiments have been reported in which samples of Mo were subjected to
shock loading on microsecond time scales by projectile impact, and the temperature in the shocked state was measured by neutron resonance spectrometry [21]. The temperature measured was around 200 K greater than predicted
using EOS that are thought to be accurate to a few percent.
The principal shock Hugoniot of Mo was calculated using material properties
previously published [22], with parameters for the Steinberg-Guinan strength
model [24], which includes work-hardening, pressure-hardening, and thermal
softening effects. The shock Hugoniot with strength lay at a significantly
higher temperature than the calculation ignoring strength, which matched
the previously-reported shock Hugoniot (Fig. 9). The temperature difference
18

200

normal stress (GPa)

principal
adiabat
150

principal
Hugoniot

100

50
release
adiabat

0
0

1000

2000
3000
temperature (K)

4000

5000

Fig. 8. Principal adiabat, shock Hugoniot, and release adiabat for Be in normal stress-temperature space, neglecting strength (dashed), for Steinberg-Guinan
strength (solid), and for elastic-perfectly plastic with Y = 10 GPa (dotted).

70

normal stress (GPa)

60

principal
adiabat

50
40
principal
Hugoniot

30
20
10
0
200

release
adiabat
300

400

500
600
700
temperature (K)

800

900

Fig. 9. Principal shock Hugoniot for Mo in normal stress-temperature space, neglecting strength (dashed) and for Steinberg-Guinan strength (solid). Also shown
is the experimental measurement of shock temperature by neutron resonance spectrometry.

was around 50 K for the shock pressures of around 60 GPa of the experiments:
a significant contribution to the discrepancy, but not all. The complete explanation involves non-idealities in the projectile accelerating system, and is
discussed elsewhere [25].
19

8

Conclusions

A general formulation was developed to represent material models for applications in dynamic loading, suitable for software implementation in objectoriented programming languages. Numerical methods were devised to calculate the response of matter represented by the general material models to
shock and ramp compression, and ramp decompression, by direct evaluation
of the thermodynamic pathways for these compressions rather than spatiallyresolved simulations. This approach is a generalization of earlier work on solutions for materials represented by a scalar equation of state. The numerical
methods were found to be flexible and robust: capable of application to materials with very different properties. The numerical solutions matched analytic
results to a high accuracy.
Care was needed with the interpretation of some types of physical response,
such as plastic flow, when applied to deformation at high strain rates. The
underlying time-dependence of processes occurring during deformation should
be taken into account. The actual history of loading and heating experienced
by material during the passage of a shock may influence the final state – this
history is not captured in the continuum approximation to material dynamics,
where shocks are treated as discontinuities. Thus care is also needed in spatially resolved simulations when shocks are modeled using artificial viscosity
to smear them unphysically over a finite thickness.
The basic ramp and shock solution methods were coupled to solve for composite deformation paths, such as shock-induced impacts, and shock interactions
with a planar interface between different materials. Such calculations capture
much of the physics of typical material dynamics experiments, without requiring spatially-resolving simulations.
Example calculations were made of loading histories in Be and Mo, illustrating
the effects of plastic work on the temperatures induced in quasi-isentropic and
shock-release experiments.

Acknowledgments

Ian Gray introduced me to the concept of multi-model material properties
software. Lee Markland developed a prototype Hugoniot-calculating computer
program for equations of state while working for me as an undergraduate
summer student.
Evolutionary work on material properties libraries was supported by the U.K.
20

Atomic Weapons Establishment, Fluid Gravity Engineering Ltd, and Wessex
Scientific and Technical Services Ltd.
Thanks are due to Steve Batha for funding through the National Nuclear Security Agency's Campaign 10 (Inertial Confinement Fusion). The work was
performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy under contracts W-7405-ENG-36 and DE-AC52-06NA25396,

References
[1] J.K. Dienes, J.M. Walsh, in R. Kinslow (Ed), High-Velocity Impact Phenomena,
Academic Press, New York, 1970.
[2] D.J. Benson, Comp. Mech. 15, 6 (1995): pp 558-571.
[3] J.W. Gehring, Jr, in R. Kinslow (Ed), High-Velocity Impact Phenomena,
Academic Press, New York, 1970.
[4] R.M. Canup, E. Asphaug, Nature 412 (2001): pp 708-712.
[5] M.A. Meyers, Dynamic Behavior of Materials, Wiley, New York, 1994.
[6] G. McQueen, S.P. March, J.W. Taylor, J.N. Fritz, W.J. Carter, in R. Kinslow
(Ed), High-Velocity Impact Phenomena, Academic Press, New York, 1970.
[7] J.D. Lindl, Inertial Confinement Fusion, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998.
[8] D.C. Swift, G.J. Ackland, A. Hauer, G.A. Kyrala, First principles equations of
state for simulations of shock waves in silicon, Phys. Rev. B 64, 214107 (2001).
[9] J.P. Poirier, G.D. Price, Primary slip system of ǫ-iron and anisotropy of the
Earth's inner core, Phys. of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 110 (1999):
pp 147-56.
[10] For a recent review and introduction, see e.g. M.R. Boslough, J.R. Asay, in
J.R. Asay, M. Shahinpoor (Eds), High-Pressure Shock Compression of Solids,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1992.
[11] R. Menikoff, B.J. Plohr, The Riemann problem for fluid flow of real materials,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 61 (1989): pp 75-130.
[12] A. Majda, The stability of multidimensional shock fronts, Mem. Amer. Math.
Soc., 41, 275 (1983).
[13] J.L. Ding, Thermal and mechanical analysis of material response to non-steady
ramp and steady shock wave loading, J. Mech. and Phys. of Solids 54 (2006):
pp 237-265.
[14] J. von Neumann, R.D. Richtmyer, A method for the numerical calculation of
hydrodynamic shocks, J. Appl. Phys. 21, 3 (1950): pp 232-237.

21

[15] R.M. Mulford, D.C. Swift, in preparation.
[16] W. Fickett, W.C. Davis, 'Detonation, University of California Press, Berkeley,
1979.
[17] E. Loomis, D.C. Swift, Interaction of oblique shock waves with the interface
between two materials, for general equations of state, in preparation.
[18] D. Benson, Computational methods in Lagrangian and Eulerian hydrocodes,
Computer Methods in Appl. Mechanics and Eng. 99, 235 (1992).
[19] R. Hill, The Mathematical Theory of Plasticity, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1950.
[20] D.C. Swift, T.E. Tierney, S.-N. Luo, D.L. Paisley, G.A. Kyrala, A. Hauer,
S.R. Greenfield, A.C. Koskelo, K.J. McClellan, H.E. Lorenzana, D. Kalantar,
B.A. Remington, P. Peralta, E. Loomis, Dynamic response of materials on subnanosecond time scales, and beryllium properties for inertial confinement fusion,
Phys.Plasmas 12, 056308 (2005).
[21] V.W. Yuan, J.D. Bowman, D.J. Funk, G.L. Morgan, R.L. Rabie, C.E. Ragan,
J.P. Quintana, H.L. Stacy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 125504 (2005).
[22] D.J. Steinberg, Equation of State and Strength Properties of Selected Materials,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory report UCRL-MA-106439 change 1
(1996).
[23] C.A. Hall, Isentropic compression experiments on the Sandia Z accelerator,
Phys. Plasmas 7, 5 (2000): pp 2069-2075.
[24] D.J. Steinberg, S.G. Cochran, M.W. Guinan, A constitutive model for metals
applicable at high strain rate, J. Appl. Phys. 51, 1498 (1980).
[25] D.C. Swift et al, Explanation of Anomalous Shock Temperatures Measured by
Neutron Resonance Spectroscopy, submitted.

22

