arXiv:2105.00091v1 [physics.app-ph] 30 Apr 2021

Inductive Power Transfer Through Saltwater
J.N. Wandinger, D.M. Roberts, J.S. Bobowski

T. Johnson

Department of Physics
University of British Columbia
Kelowna, Canada
email: jake.bobowski@ubc.ca

School of Engineering
University of British Columbia
Kelowna, Canada
email: thomas.johnson@ubc.ca

II. P ROBING EM MATERIAL PROPERTIES
Abstract-We investigated inductive power transfer (IPT)
through a rectangular slab of saltwater. Our inductively-coupled
transmitters and receivers were made from loop-gap resonators
(LGRs) having resonant frequencies near 100 MHz. Electric fields
are confined within the narrow gaps of the LGRs making it
possible to strongly suppress the power dissipation associated
with electric fields in a conductive medium. Therefore, the power
transfer efficiency in our system was limited by magnetic field
dissipation in the conducting medium. We measured the power
transfer efficiency as a function of both the conductivity of
the water and the resonant frequency of the LGRs. We also
present an equivalent circuit model that can be used to model
IPT through a conductive medium. Finally, we show that using
dividers to partition the saltwater volume provides another means
of enhancing power transfer efficiency.
Index Terms-Conducting media, inductive power transfer
(IPT), loop-gap resonator (LGR), power dissipation, saltwater,
wireless power transfer (WPT)

I. I NTRODUCTION
Loop-gap resonators (LGRs) are electrically-small high-Q
resonators that can be used to make sensitive measurements
of the electromagnetic (EM) properties of materials at RF
and microwave frequencies [1], [2]. Shown in Fig. 1(a), the
cylindrical LGR (CLGR) consists of a conducting tube with
a narrow slit cut along its length. This structure can be
accurately modeled as a series LRC circuit. The effective
capacitance and inductance are determined by the geometry of
the resonator gap and bore, respectively. Currents run along the
inner surface of the LGR bore and power dissipation associated
with both conductive and radiative losses contribute to the
resontor's effective resistance [1], [3]. Radiative losses can be
suppressed by joining the two ends of the CLGR to form a
toroid that confines the magnetic fields [4]. A schematic of
the toroidal LGR (TLGR) is shown in Fig. 1(b). Parts (c)
and (d) of Fig. 1 show cross-sectional views of the CLGR
and TLGR with the important dimensions labeled. Part (d)
of the figure also shows a coupling loop suspended within
the bore of the TLGR. The coupling loop is made by shortcircuiting the center conductor of a coaxial cable to the outer
conductor and is used to inductively couple signals into and
out of the resonator. In the same way, CLGRs can be excited
and probed by placing coupling loops near the ends of the
resonator bore [5].
We thank NSERC for providing funding for this project.

In this section, we give a simple description of how LGRs
can be used to make sensitive measurements of the complex
permittivity and conductivity of materials. The resonant frequency ω0 and the resonator quality factory Q0 are modified
by the electrical properties of materials placed in the LGR
gap. Current flow across the LGR gap has two components:
1) a displacement current that depends on the permittivity of
the material and 2) charge transfer via a conduction current
that depends on the conductivity of the material.
The gap admittance is given by Yg = jωεr C0 + Rx−1 ,
where ω is angular frequency, εr = ε0 − jε00 is the complex
permittivity of the gap material, C0 is the capacitance of the
gap when it is empty, and Rx is the resistance due to the
gap geometry and the conductivity σ of the gap material.
Expressing Rx−1 = σA/t = σC0 /ε0 , where A is the gap area
and ε0 is the permittivity of free space, allows one to write



σ
0
00
Yg = ω jε + ε +
C0 .
(1)
ωε0
Assuming radiative losses have been suppressed using either
a CLGR with an EM shield or a TLGR,
pthe effective resistance
of the LGR can be written as R = R0 ω/ω0 , where R0 is the
resistance at the resonant frequency ω0 of the empty resonator
and the ω 1/2 frequency dependence is due to the skin depth
δ. In this case, the impedance of the LGR with a filled gap
−1
becomes Z = R1 + jωL0 + (jωC1 ) where
#
"
r
ω
1
ε00 + σ/ (ωε0 )
R1 = R0
+
(2)
ω0
ωC0 (ε0 )2 + (ε00 + σ/ (ωε0 ))2
"
#
2
2
(ε0 ) + (ε00 + σ/ (ωε0 ))
C1 = C0
,
(3)
ε0
√
and ω0 = 1/ L0 C0 is the resonant frequency of the empty
resonator.
The resonant frequency ω1 and quality factor Q1 of the
gap-filled√ resonator at ω = p
ω1 can be calculated using
ω1 = 1/ L0 C1 and Q−1
=
R
1 C1 /L0 . The results are
1
 2
ω1
ε0
=
(4)
2
2
ω0
(ε0 ) + (ε00 + σ/ (ω1 ε0 ))
r
1
1
ω0
ε00 + σ/ (ω1 ε0 )
=
+
.
(5)
Q1
Q0 ω1
ε0

©2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 1. Schematic drawings of the LGR designs. (a) A CLGR of length `. The dashed line represents a conducting joint between two identical halves used to
form the complete resonator. (b) A TLGR with a section cut away to expose the interior. (c) A cross-sectional view of the CLGR with the critical dimensions
labeled. (d) A cross-sectional view of the TLGR with its critical dimensions labeled. A coupling loop is also shown suspended within the bore of the resonator.
The semi-transparent lines indicate the position of the coarse divider discussed in Section V-A.

Therefore, measurements of ω0 and Q0 with the LGR gap
empty, followed by measurements of ω1 and Q1 with the gap
filled, can be combined with (4) and (5) to determine ε0 and
ε00 +σ/ (ω1 ε0 ). If either of the ε00 or σ loss terms are dominant,
as is often the case, then either ε0 and ε00 or ε0 and σ can
be independently determined. This type of analysis has been
used to study the EM properties of air, water, saltwater, liquid
nitrogen, and methyl alcohol [3], [6].
It is also worth noting that, in an analogous way, the
magnetic properties of materials can be investigated by filling
the bore of a LGR with the material of interest [7]–[12].
III. I NDUCTIVE P OWER T RANSFER
More recently, we have developed efficient mid-range inductive power transfer (IPT) systems using LGR transmitters and
receivers [13]. The term mid-range implies wireless energy
exchange over distances that are several times the largest
dimension of the transmitter/receiver [14], [15]. Figures 2(a)
and (b) show the experimental setups of the CLGR and TLGR
IPT systems, respectively. In these figures, power is transferred
wirelessly through a slab of saltwater. In the case of the TLGR
system, the transmit and receive resonators are formed by
dividing a complete TLGR with resonant frequency ω0 into
two equal halves. This division of the of the TLGR does not
significantly alter the flow or distribution of charge in the
structures and results in a pair of identical split-TLGRs with
resonant frequencies approximately equal to ω0 .
Compared to helical and spiral resonators typically used in
IPT systems, LGRs have the advantage that they allow for
some shaping of the EM fields in the space surrounding the
power-transfer link. Specifically, electric fields are strongly
confined to the narrow gap of the LGRs. For IPT through

a conductive medium, such as saltwater, this is an important
advantage because excluding the conducting medium from
the gap region effectively eliminates electric field power
dissipation which is proportional to σE 2 . Filling the gap with a
low-loss dielectric, such as Teflon or Al2 O3 , is a simple way
to isolate the electric fields in the gap from the conducting
medium. For IPT through a conductive medium, there will
also be power losses associated with the oscillating magnetic
fields. We consider this source of dissipation in Section IV.
The split-TLGR system has the additional advantage that
the magnetic field strength outside the resonators is weak
everywhere except between the transmitter and receiver [13].
This field configuration limits the exposure of nearby individuals to EM fields, which is especially important in highpower applications. For power transfer through a conducting
medium, the CLGR configuration has magnetic power dissipation throughout the entire volume of space surrounding the
pair of resonators. In contrast, for the TLGR configuration, the
magnetic field dissipation is primarily confined to the spatial
volume directly between the bores of the transmit and receive
resonators.
IV. P OWER D ISSIPATION BY A C ONDUCTING M EDIUM
We now present an approximate calculation of the power
dissipation expected from an oscillating magnetic field in a
conducting medium. Although not rigorous, the results identify
parameters that are important for practical designs. Figure 3
shows an example of a transmit or receive resonator immersed
in a medium of uniform conductivity σ. Although the figure
shows a CLGR, the calculations that follow can be applied to
both the CLGR and split-TLGR geometries.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. Photographs of IPT through a 3.7-cm thick slab of saltwater for both the (a) CLGR and (b) split-TLGR systems. The coarse and fine dividers used
with the split-TLGR system are also shown in (b). The 102 μm gaps in the CLGRs are so narrow that they are not clearly visibile in the photograph.

σ

current loop of Fig. 3 is given by

dx

B(x)

δP = E 2 δG = (π/2) r3 σω02 B02 (x) sin2 ω0 t dr dx.

r0
i

I

r
dr

x
Fig. 3. Schematic of the geometry used to estimate the magnetic power
dissipated by the conducting medium.

We assume an oscillating magnetic field of the form
B(x) = B0 (x) cos ω0 t, where ω0 is the resonant frequency of
the LGR. The x-axis is chosen to coincide with the axis of
the LGR bore. In any plane perpendicular to the x-axis, B0 is
assumed to be uniform for r ≤ r0 and zero for r > r0 . Here,
r is the radial distance measured from the x-axis and r0 is the
radius of the LGR bore. In the region between the transmit and
receive resonators, B0 will initially decrease as it moves away
from the transmit resonator and then increase as it approaches
the receive resonator. The power dissipation is estimated by
first finding the induced emf E around a circular loop of radius
r due to the changing magnetic flux. We then estimate the
resistance along the path followed by the resulting current.
Next, the power dissipation associated with each infinitesimal
current loop is calculated. Finally, the contributions from all
current loops within a plane of width dx are summed.
Consider the infinitesimal ring of inner radius r < r0 ,
outer radius r + dr, and width dx as shown in Fig. 3. The
magnetic flux Φ through the ring induces a current i which
flows along the circumference of the ring and through a crosssectional area given by dr dx. Therefore, the conductance of
this infinitesimal ring is δG = σ dr dx/ (2πr). The induced
emf E is calculated from −dΦ/dt which, in the assumed
geometry, is approximately E ≈ πr2 ω0 B0 (x) sin ω0 t. As a
result, the power dissipation associated with the infinitesimal

(6)

The power dissipated by all current loops in a disk of
thickness dx is obtained by integrating δP with respect to r
from zero to r0 , the radial range over which B0 (x) is assumed
to be non-zero and constant. Evaluating this integral and taking
a time average over one period yields
Z r0

hdP i =
δP = (π/16) r04 σω02 B02 (x) dx.
(7)
r=0

Finding the total power dissipated in the space between the
transmit and receive resonators requires an integration with
respect to x and a suitable model for the spatial dependence
of B0 (x).
Fortunately, (7) already reveals a number of useful insights.
First, the magnetic power dissipated by the conductive medium
is proportional to the conductivity σ. Second, for a fixed
conductivity, power dissipation can be reduced by decreasing
either ω0 or r0 . In Section V, we describe a set of experiments
designed to separately test each one of these inferences. We
first note that since ω0 ∝ 1/r0 , the frequency can be decreased
by increasing the size of the LGR [1], [3]. However, this is
not a good strategy because magnetic power loss varies by
r04 which is much more significant than the ω02 dependence
shown in (7). Instead, it is best to design the LGR to be as
small as possible and then lower the resonant frequency by
filling the gap with a low-loss and high-permittivity dielectric.
A potential dielectric material for the capacitive gap is Mgdoped (Ba, Sr) TiO3 which can simultaneously have very low
loss tangents and relative permittivities as high as 103 [16],
[17].
V. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
The experimental setups for IPT through saltwater using
CLGRs and split-TLGRs are shown in Figs. 2(a) and (b),
respectively. All of the transmission coefficient (S21 ) data
reported in this paper were acquired using an SDR-Kits
DG8SAQ vector network analyzer (VNA). A tank made from

0

−2

−2

−4

−4
peak |S21 | (dB)

peak |S21 | (dB)

0

−6
−8

−10
−12
−14
10

(a)

−6
−8

−10
split-TLGR

CLGR
100 MHz
165 MHz
236 MHz
−4

10

−3

−12

10

−2

σ(Ω

10
−1

−1

m

−1

10

0

10

−14

10−4

1

)

(b)

no divider
coarse divider
fine divider
10−3

10−2
σ(Ω

10−1
−1

−1

m

100

101

)

Fig. 4. Peak |S21 | as a function of conductivity. The horizontal dashed lines are placed at −3 dB. The vertical dotted lines indicate the critical conductivity
of the various systems investigated. (a) CLGR IPT with the system resonant frequency tuned to three different values. The critical conductivity decreases with
increasing frequency. (b) TLGR IPT with and without dividers used to suppress induced current loops in the saltwater. The solid line is a fit to the circuit
model shown in Fig. 5.

sheets of acrylic and epoxy was used to contain the saltwater.
The tank was 44.0 mm thick and made using acrylic sheets
that were 3.7 mm thick. The width and height of the tank were
large enough that the magnetic field linking the transmit and
receive resonators passed through the 36.6-mm thick saltwater
slab.
The design details of the LGRs are described elsewhere [13]. However, we note that, with a Teflon dielectric
filling the gaps, the resonant frequencies of the CLGRs and
split-TLGRs were 100 MHz and 120 MHz, respectively.
For both the CLGR and split-TLGR systems, data was
collected as follows: First, the water tank was filled with
1 L of deionized water with a base resistivity of 15.4 MΩ cm.
The LGR transmitter and receiver were then placed in contact
with the two sides of the tank and the coupling loops were
tuned to achieve optimal power transfer efficiency. Next, the
VNA was used to record an |S21 | frequency sweep and the
conductivity of the water was measured using a Beckman RC16C conductivity bridge. This procedure was repeated as NaCl
was added to the water in small amounts at a time. For each
concentration of NaCl, the salt was allowed to completely
dissolve and the tuning of the coupling loops was refined
before acquiring the data.
Figures 4(a) and (b) show the peak value of |S21 | in decibels
as a function of conductivity for the CLGR and split-TLGR
IPT systems, respectively. For all of the various datasets
shown, peak |S21 | is approximately flat at low conductivity
before dropping off steeply above a critical conductivity that
we denote σc . Qualitatively, this behaviour can be understood
in terms of the equivalent circuit model of a four-coil IPT
system shown in Fig. 5. In this circuit, Rt and Rr represent
the intrinsic effective resistances of the LGRs and Rσ accounts

Fig. 5. An equivalent circuit model of a four-coil IPT system operating in a
conducting medium. The signal source has output impedance Z0 and supplies
voltage vs and Z` is the load impedance. The resistance Rσ divides the
induced emf between the transmitter/receiver resonators and the conducting
medium.

for additional magnetic losses due to the saltwater. At low
conductivity, Rt , Rr  Rσ and |S21 | is approximately independent of σ. However, above σc , Rσ dominates and the |S21 |
peak drops as σ is increased. The solid line in Fig. 4(b) is a fit
to the split-TLGR data using a model for |S21 | calculated from
the equivalent circuit. The fit assumed Rσ = aσ, where a is
the only free fit parameter and depends on the experimental
geometry. The other circuit parameters were obtained from a
separate analysis of the split-TLGR system when transmitting
power across an air gap [13]. The fit is excellent and returned
a best-fit value of a = (5.81 ± 0.07) × 10−2 Ω2 m.
A. Power transfer efficiency versus frequency
The CLGR and split-TLGRs were each made from two
identical halves that bolt together to form the complete res-

onator. The dashed line in Fig 1(a) indicates the conducting
joint in the CLGR. Inserting thin strips of copper tape,
each 89 μm thick, between this joint provided a simple way
of increasing the gap dimension t (thereby decreasing the
capacitance) while making only a negligible change to r0 and
the inductance. This strategy, combined with extracting the
Teflon dielectric from the gap, was implemented to increase
the operating frequency of the CLGR IPT link above the
base frequency of 100 MHz while keeping the resonator size
2 (r0 + w) fixed. Figure 4(a) shows the peak |S21 | as a
function of conductivity for three different CLGR resonant
frequencies. As seen from the frequency dependence of the
critical conductivity σc , the system performance degrades as
IPT operating frequency is increased. This observation is
consistent with (7) and the analysis presented in Section IV.
B. Suppressing large-radius current loops
Finally, we repeated the peak |S21 | versus σ measurements
for the split-TLGR system after inserting dividers into the
saltwater bath. The dividers were used to partition the saltwater
in an effort to suppress large-radius current loops. Equation
(7) suggests that the magnetic power dissipation is a strong
function of r0 , the maximum radius of the induced current
loops. Therefore, using dividers to reduce the average size of
the current loops is expected to enhance the IPT efficiency.
The semi-transparent lines in Fig. 1(d) indicate the position
of the coarse divider used in our experiments. The coarse divider, made from thin plastic strips, is also shown in Fig. 2(b).
The circular data points in Fig. 4(b) show peak |S21 | as a
function of σ when the coarse divider was in place. As anticipated, the power transfer efficiency improved and σc doubled
from 0.75 Ω−1 m−1 without a divider to 1.5 Ω−1 m−1 with
the coarse divider. We repeated the measurements using a fine
divider, also shown in Fig. 2(b), made by stacking and gluing
sheets of corrugated plastic with parallel 3.5 mm × 3.5 mm
channels. To get the saltwater to penetrate into the narrow
channels, 5 mL of dish soap was added to act as a surfactant.
We first verified that the added soap did not alter the |S21 |
versus σ data with no divider in place. As shown in Fig. 4(b),
the fine divider caused σc to increase to 2.0 Ω−1 m−1 . At a
conductivity of 5.0 Ω−1 m−1 , typical of seawater, the coarse
and fine dividers improved the peak power transfer efficiency
by 3.4 and 6.6 dB, respectively.
VI. C ONCLUSION
We have demonstrated IPT through saltwater using LGR
transmitters and receivers. Below a critical conductivity σc ,
dissipation is dominated by losses that are intrinsic to the
LGRs. However, above σc , magnetic power dissipation by
the saltwater becomes important and the power transfer efficiency rapidly drops. We showed that the critical conductivity
increases as the LGR resonant frequency is decreased for a
resonator of fixed size. Using dividers to partition the saltwater
volume, we found that restricting the size of the induced
current loops in the conducting medium provided another
means to enhance the power transfer efficiency. All of these

observations are consistent with an approximate calculation of
the expected magnetic power dissipation due to a conducting
medium. Our results suggest that the highest efficiency will be
achieved by simultaneously minimizing the resonator size and
resonant frequency. For LGRs, these design criteria are best
met by filling the narrow gap of the resonators with a high-εr
and low-loss dielectric.
We are currently experimenting with LGR transmitters
and receivers equipped with watertight seals used to exclude
saltwater from the gaps and bores of the resonators. The seals
allow us to completely submerge the LGRs in a saltwater
bath and work with testbeds that more closely replicate the
conditions expected in practical applications.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. N. Hardy and L. A. Whitehead, "Split-ring resonator for use in
magnetic resonance from 200–2000 MHz," Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 52,
no. 2, pp. 213–216, Feb. 1981.
[2] W. Froncisz and J. S. Hyde, "The loop-gap resonator: A new microwave
lumped circuit ESR sample structure," J. Magn. Reson., vol. 47, no. 3,
pp. 515–521, May 1982.
[3] J. S. Bobowski, "Using split-ring resonators to measure the electromagnetic properties of materials: An experiment for senior physics
undergraduates," Am. J. Phys., vol. 81, no. 12, pp. 899–906, Dec. 2013.
[4] J. S. Bobowski and H. Nakahara, "Design and characterization of a
novel toroidal split-ring resonator," Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 87, no. 2,
pp. 024701, Feb. 2016.
[5] G. A. Rinard, R. W. Quine, S. S. Eaton, and G. R. Eaton, "Microwave
coupling structures for spectroscopy," J. Magn. Reson. Ser. A, vol. 105,
no. 2, pp. 137–144, Nov. 1993.
[6] J. S. Bobowski and A. P. Clements, "Permittivity and conductivity
measured using a novel toroidal split-ring resonator," IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 2132–2138, June 2017.
[7] J. S. Bobowski, "Using split-ring resonators to measure complex permittivity and permeability," in Proc. Conf. Lab. Instruct. Beyond First
Year College, College Park, MD, USA, 215, pp. 20–23.
[8] D. A. Bonn, D. C. Morgan and W. N. Hardy, "Split-ring resonators for
measuring microwave surface resistance of oxide superconductors," Rev.
Sci. Instrum., vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1819–1823, July 1991.
[9] W. N. Hardy, D. A. Bonn, D. C. Morgan, R. Liang and K. Zhang,
"Precision measurements of the temperature dependence of λ in
YBa2 Cu3 O6.95 : Strong evidence for nodes in the gap function," Phys.
Rev. Lett., vol. 70, no. 25, pp. 3999–4002, June 1993.
[10] J. Dubreuil and J. S. Bobowski, "Ferromagnetic resonance in the complex permeability of an Fe3 O4 -based ferrofluid at radio and microwave
frequencies," J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 489, pp. 165387, Nov. 2019.
[11] J. S. Bobowski, "Probing split-ring resonator permeabilities with loopgap resonators," Can. J. Phys., vol. 96, no. 8, pp. 878–886, Aug. 2018.
[12] S. L. Madsen and J. S. Bobowski, "The complex permeability of splitring resonator arrays measured at microwave frequencies," IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 86, no. 8, pp. 3547–3557, Aug. 2020.
[13] D. M. Roberts, A. P. Clements, R. McDonald, J. S. Bobowski, and
T. Johnson, "Mid-range wireless power transfer at 100 MHz using
magnetically-coupled loop-gap resonators," 2021. [Online]. Available:
arXiv:2103.14798.
[14] A. Kurs, A. Karalis, R. Moffatt, J. D. Joannopoulos, P. Fisher and
M. Soljačić, "Wireless power transfer via strongly coupled magnetic
resonances," Science, vol. 317, no. 5834, pp. 83–86, Jul. 2007.
[15] A. Karalis, J. D. Joannopoulos and M. Soljačić, "Efficient wireless nonradiative mid-range energy transfer," Ann. Phys., vol. 323, no. 1, pp. 34–
48, Jan. 2008.
[16] E. A. Nenasheva, N. F. Kartenko, I. M. Gaidamaka, O. N. Trubitsyna, S.
S. Redozubov, A. I. Dedyk and A. D. Kanareykin, "Low loss microwave
ferroelectric ceramics for high power tunable devices," J. Eur. Ceram.
Soc., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 395–400, Jan. 2010.
[17] M. Song, P. Belov and P. Kapitanova, "Wireless power transfer based
on dielectric resonators with colossal permittivity," Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 109, no. 22, p. 223902, Dec. 2016.

