Vessel and Port Efficiency Metrics through
Validated AIS data
Tomaž Martinčič∗† , Dejan Štepec∗† , Joao Pita Costa∗ , Kristijan Čagran∗ and Athanasios Chaldeakis‡
∗ XLAB

arXiv:2105.00063v1 [cs.AI] 30 Apr 2021

Research, Ljubljana, Slovenia
{tomaz.martincic, dejan.stepec, joao.pitacosta, kristijan.cagran}@xlab.si
† University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Computer and Information Science, Ljubljana, Slovenia
‡ Piraeus Port Authority, Piraeus, Greece

Abstract-Automatic Identification System (AIS) data represents a rich source of information about maritime traffic and
offers a great potential for data analytics and predictive modelling
solutions, which can help optimizing logistic chains and reducing
environmental impacts. In this work, we address the main limitations of the validity of AIS navigational data fields, by proposing
a machine learning-based data-driven methodology to detect and
(to the possible extent) also correct erroneous data. Additionally,
we propose a metric that can be used by vessel operators and
ports to express numerically their business and environmental
efficiency through time and spatial dimensions, enabled with
the obtained validated AIS data. We also demonstrate Port
Area Vessel Movements (PARES) tool, which demonstrates the
proposed solutions.
Index Terms-AIS, data validation, port metrics, environment,
covid-19

I. I NTRODUCTION
Automatic Identification System (AIS) data represents a
rich source of maritime traffic information, and offers a great
potential for data analytic and predictive modelling solutions, which can help optimizing logistic chains and reducing
environmental impacts. In this work we address the main
limitations of the validity of AIS navigational data fields, by
proposing a machine learning-based data-driven methodology
to detect and (to the most possible extent) also correct erroneous data. Additionally, we propose a metric that can be
used by vessel operators and ports to numerically express their
business and environmental efficiency through time and spatial
dimensions, enabled with such obtained validated AIS data.
Different studies have reported significant errors in the
transmitted AIS data [1], which can significantly reduce its
usability and effectiveness for gathering insights using automated data analytics solutions. One of the most interesting
AIS reported fields is that of navigational status, which could
serve as an essential tool to measure port's business (e.g.
vessel waiting times, vessel turnaround times), as well as
environmental (e.g. emission) metrics. Studies have found that
at least 30% of the vessels were detected as transmitting
incorrect status information. An example of errors in AIS
navigational status is presented in Figure 1a. Vessels can be
moored only at terminals. However, sometimes they report
moored navigational status in the anchorage areas, or even
while sailing. Other navigational statuses are also occasionally
falsely reported.

Some of the static AIS reported fields (e.g. vessel type,
MMSI, IMO), can be corrected through dedicated maritime
vessel databases, but this is not the case with the dynamically
reported fields (e.g. navigational status). In order to correct
navigational status in real-time, we propose and compare three
different approaches. The first approach utilizes the vessel's
speed and location, along with the predetermined location of
anchorage and terminal areas. The downside of this method
is the requirement of setting the speed threshold and the
availability of GIS data (anchorage and port areas) from the
ports. As the second approach, we propose to utilize the
vessel's speed and rotation information, which omits the need
for manually provided data. Finally, we propose to utilize
different machine learning techniques [2], [3] on reported AIS
fields (spatial and kinematic), which automatically classifies
reported information into appropriate navigational status, that
is validated with the reported one. An example of corrected
AIS transmitted navigational data is presented in Figure 1b.
Validated AIS data is used to extract vessel voyages in a
predefined area, and the time spent in different navigational
positions is calculated, in order to evaluate port entry and port
turnaround times. We have evaluated our proposed methods
in the Port of Piraeus (Greece), where historical data (one
year) and live AIS data is collected from the AISHub1 . Vessel
arrivals and turnaround times are validated against FAL forms
data collected by the port. Proposed port efficiency metrics
based on waiting times are globally applicable, without the
need for manually provided data. Port efficiency metrics for
different ports are computed in an interval of one year and
combined with vessel-specific AIS reported fields (e.g. vessel
type, vessel length), which provides additional value to the
proposed automatic data-driven metric. This allows for the
comparison on a vessel and cargo level.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• Three different methods for AIS navigational status validation and correction, based on static and manually
provided data, as well as a completely automatic machine
learning-based approach.
• The procedure for extracting vessel voyages out of validated AIS data in a predefined area, together with port
and vessel efficiency metric for the calculation of time
1 http://www.aishub.net/

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: Reported AIS navigational statuses with errors (a) and corrected navigational statues by our methods (b). Red: under
way using engine, blue: at anchor, yellow: moored.

•

spent in different navigational positions (e.g. port entry
waiting time, port turnaround time).
The evaluation of the proposed methods on live and historical AIS data in different ports, together with validation
against ground truth data provided in Port of Piraeus
(FAL forms).
II. R ELATED W ORK

The availability of large-scale Automatic Identification System (AIS) data, made available by the recent build-up of
terrestrial, as well as satellite constellations offers an essential
tool for maritime situational awareness applications [4]. Different studies have reported significant errors in the transmitted
AIS data [1], which can significantly reduce its usability
and effectiveness for gathering insights using automated data
analytics solutions. One of the most interesting AIS reported
fields is that of navigational status, which could serve as a tool
to measure port's business (e.g. vessel waiting times, vessel
turnaround times), as well as environmental (e.g. emission)
metrics. Studies have found that at least 30% of the vessels
were detected as transmitting incorrect status information.
Most of the work is focused on using reported positional data
for route extraction, prediction and anomaly detection [4]–[6]
and are not utilizing the reported AIS navigational statuses,
due to its unreliability [7].
Most of the work around port areas and regions of highdensity traffic is focused on simple statistical analysis and
visualizations of reported AIS data [8], [9]. In our work,
we propose to use validated AIS data to extract vessel voyages in a predefined area and the time spent in different
navigational positions, in order to evaluate port entry and
port turnaround times. Besides serving as a useful tool to
measure aspects of the port's business metric (e.g. vessel
waiting times, vessel turnaround times), the same approach
also supports the estimation of environmental (e.g. emission)
impacts [7]. In comparison with the most common approach of
AIS navigational data use and validation [7], [10], where speed

information is used to classify navigational status into three
newly defined classes (cruising mode, maneuvering mode,
hotelling mode), we propose a method that validates, preserves
and uses the originally reported navigational statuses.
III. P ORT A REA V ESSEL M OVEMENTS - PARES
The Port Area Vessel Movements (PARES) tool (presented
in Figure 2), validates and utilizes AIS data to extract information about vessels movements inside the port areas. The
tool can process historical data or work in live mode. The
process of extracting movements and times consists of three
main steps. In the first step, the PARES tool has to select data
based on the selected time period, the vessel's location and
the vessel types. In the second step, the model has to validate
the data and extract additional features, which are used in the
third step to clean the data and group the AIS messages into
separate voyages. In the context of PARES, voyage is defined
as all movements that vessels make inside of the port area at
single arrival to the port. The first vessel arrives to the port
area, then it sails to the terminal with an optional stop in
the anchorage area. When the vessel arrives to the terminal,
the cargo processing operations can begin. After all cargo is
unloaded and loaded onto the vessel, it leaves the port. The
PARES model extracts information about waiting times at the
anchorage area, cargo processing times at the terminal and
the duration of the vessel movements inside of the port area,
together with the average speed of the movements.
A. AIS Data Validation
One of the most important features in AIS messages, also
validated by the PARES is the vessel navigational status.
This is a crucial piece of information, used to split the
voyage into separate parts. The tool takes advantage of three
navigational statuses: 0 (underway using engine), 1 (at anchor),
and 5 (moored). We developed three different approaches to
determinate vessel navigational status. Each approach has its
own advantages and disadvantages.

Fig. 2: Port Area Vessel Movements (PARES) tool used for maritime traffic analysis around Port of Piraeus using validated
AIS data, depicting vessels captured in the bay area and detailed analysis for a particular vessel.

In the first approach navigational statuses are determined
based on vessel location and its speed. For the location, we
observe if the vessel is inside predefined polygons that mark
anchorage and terminal areas (see Figure 3). The main problems here are that polygons have to be determined manually
and that the vessel can anchorage on the border of a polygon.
In that case, the PARES tool would falsely detect multiple
changes of the navigational status. The vessel can be entering
and exiting anchorage area polygon multiple times during
single anchoring, due to normal vessel movements during
anchorage.
In the second approach we observe the vessel's speed
and rate of rotation. Moored and anchored vessels are not
moving, with exception of rotations of anchored vessels. This
distinction can be used to separate moored and anchored
vessels. For example, vessel's speed and heading, with marked
anchoring and mooring periods, are plotted in Figure 4.
Vessels that are moored at terminal cannot rotate and vessels
at anchorage normally rotate due to winds and water flows
(circles in anchorage area in the Figure 1). The method is very
accurate for longer stops, but can be unreliable for detecting
short duration anchorages, where the vessel has not rotated
enough. It is important to encode vessel heading, considering
it has cyclical values in range between 0° and 360°. We
encoded it using sin cos cyclical encoding (sin( 2πheading
) and
360
2πheading
cos( 360 )). This yields two features with values between
-1 and 1.
In the third approach we utilized machine learning algorithms. Multiple algorithms and libraries were evaluated.
From unsupervised clustering technique HDBSCAN [2], to
supervised classification methods, such as CatBoost [3] and
k-nearest neighbours (KNN). With HDBSCAN we obtained
clusters of anchored and moored vessels, from AIS messages
of stopped vessels, based on their location and reported navigational status. With CatBoost we tried to classify navigational
status from vessel location and speed. We also prepared
lagged features, that helped the model for more accurate

classifications. The cleanest result was produced by KNN with
large number of neighbours taken into account. With the KNN
we classified navigational status of stopped vessels from vessel
location. For best results, at least 300 neighbours were used.
Another problem is that of the missing AIS messages. There
are different types of data outages. If there are missing AIS
messages of a single vessel: AIS transmitter is not working
properly, or it is turned off on purpose. If there are missing AIS
messages in a specific area, there is a problem with terrestrial
based AIS receiver, or the area is not covered. If there is no
AIS data for some period, the problem is in the AIS data
provider or in our AIS data collection system. In some cases
we can just ignore the data loss. If the vessel was moored
or anchored for the whole time of data outage, or the vessel
was moving in straight line. In other cases we cannot extract
correct times. The best solution is to mark vessel stops or time
periods with missing data.
B. Voyage Extraction
Voyage represents vessel movement in port area. From the
arrival to the port area, the optional stop in the anchorage area,
the stop at the terminal and the departure from the port area.
Validated messages are grouped into the voyages based on
the vessel identification number (MMSI) and time between
two consecutive AIS messages in the port area. If there is less
than 24 hours between two messages from the same vessels in
the port area, the messages can be grouped into the voyage. If
the gap in messages is more than 5 hours long and the vessel
moved for more than 100 meters in that time, the chain of AIS
messages is split into two voyages at that point. To extract
voyages, we built pandas dataframe from AIS messages in a
selected port area. Each row represents a single AIS message,
and columns represent AIS message fields. We sorted rows
by MMSI and time. To split data in different voyages, we
built a set of different conditions that compare two consecutive
rows. Change of MMSI, more than 24 hour time gap, more
than 5 hour time gap and change of location for more than

1

7.5

0.5

5

0

2.5

0

−0.5

Dec 17
2019
Speed
Heading SIN

Fig. 3: Manually drawn polygons in PPA port area. Anchorage area with blue color and terminals with yellow.

100 meters. For efficient comparison of consecutive rows, we
utilized the pandas dataframe shift method.
C. Port Efficiency Metrics
The PARES tool is capable of providing different metrics
for describing the current state of vessels in the port and its
surrounding areas, as well as historical data analysis.
Turnaround time is one of the ports' key performance
indicators. The faster cargo is unloaded and loaded, the better
the port is. The PARES can automatically extract this information from AIS data. Time periods aggregations (e.g. weekly
aggregations) can be used to monitor the port's performance
through time. It is also possible to compare different ports. We
identified several vessels with multiple arrivals in two or more
ports, for which we have enabled the PARES tool. One of the
problems when comparing different ports is that we don't have
information about amount of cargo.
It is possible to monitor arrival and departure times for
different parts of port. With the tool someone could spot
abnormal or even missing arrival or departure of regular
vessels lines.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
The PARES tool was tested on more than one year of
historical AIS data made available by AISHub and validated
on 2 months of data collected in Port of Piraeus (Greece).
Though, it is directly applicable to any port in the world,
without the need of port cooperation. It is hard to get ground
truth data for validation of the results from the PARES tool.
For the validation of the turnaround times in the port, the AIS
gathered data can be validated against the data by the Port
Community Systems (PCS) in the ports. The data is manually
entered, so we have no way of knowing how accurately
the times are entered. It is possible to export vessel calls
data from MarineTraffic2 , but for the ports of our interest,
2 https://www.marinetraffic.com

Dec 18

Dec 19

Heading (encoded)

Speed [kn]

10

−1

Moving threshold
Heading COS

Fig. 4: Vessel speed and its encoded heading during
anchored (blue background) and moored (yellow background) period.

polygons capture larger port area and not just the terminals,
thus turnaround times can have significant offsets of multiple
hours, making data not accurate enough in order to validate
the PARES tool.
Obtained vessel calls data from Port of Piraeus is missing
vessel departure times and contains only arrival times. Therefore, we were not able to compare turnaround times detected
by the PARES with the ground truth data captured in the port.
Instead, we compared number of daily arrivals detected by
the PARES with daily arrivals captured in the PCS. Averaged
Mean Average Error (MAE) across all vessel types is 4.46
with an average of 54 arrivals per day, captured in the ground
truth data. The comparison is plotted in Figure 6.
Aggregated vessel arrivals provide useful information for
analysis. Number of daily arrivals to the Port of Piraeus, based
on vessel type, are presented in Figure 5. We grouped vessel
types into 3 different categories, cargo vessels (AIS type 70
- 79), tankers (AIS type 80 - 89) and passenger vessels (AIS
type 40 - 49 and 60 - 69). The number of arrivals of cargo
vessels and tankers has some variance, but no obvious trend.
The passenger vessels follow a strong seasonal trend, with the
most traffic happening in the summer months. In the summer
of 2019, we can observe weekly periodical trends in passenger
vessels traffic, with peaks over the weekends. Grey periods are
marking the time with possible disruptions on the collection
of AIS data. There are five labour strikes3 , most of them
having visible noticeable effect on the number of daily arrivals,
especially on passenger vessels. Extreme weather (e.g. strong
winds) conditions can also interrupt the maritime traffic. The
number of arrivals of passenger vessels severely dropped in
March, due to the progress of the COVID-19 pandemic in
Europe. The maritime passenger traffic started to recover in
the end of May. However, the numbers in July and August are
still lower than in the last year. No significant reduction of
3 https://citystarcar.com/strikes/

Number of daily arrivals

80
60
40
20
0
Jul 2019

Sep 2019

Cargo vessels

Nov 2019

Passenger vessels

Jan 2020
Tankers

Strikes

Mar 2020

May 2020

Jul 2020

Strong winds

Number of daily arrivals

Fig. 5: Number of daily arrivals of cargo vessels, passenger vessels and tankers to the Port of Piraeus. Different events are
labelled on a timeline, representing the cause for the reduce traffic, Gray areas represents periods with missing AIS data.
60

with daily departures at 4:20AM in the morning and arrivals
around 2:10PM in the afternoon. It is possible to monitor
possible delays in arrivals or departures. In the presented
sample, the vessel did not depart from the passenger terminal
in two occasions in a short period of time. The first missed
departure was caused by strong winds4 and the second one by
a general ferry strike5 .

40

20

0
Sep 29
Oct 13
2019 Cargo vessels (P)

Oct 27

Cargo vessels (G)

Nov 10

Nov 24

Passenger vessels (P)
Passenger vessels (G)

Strikes

Fig. 6: Number of daily arrivals detected by PARES compared
with ground truth vessel call data from the port. Comparison
is made separately for passenger and cargo vessels. Gray area
depicts missing data in the port or in the AIS collection
process.
TABLE I: Arrivals and departures of High speed vessel
(MMSI: ) into PPA passenger terminal.
Arrival time
***
2019-09-12
2019-09-13
2019-09-15
2019-09-16
***
2019-09-21
2019-09-22
2019-09-23
2019-09-25
***

Departure time
14:28
15:44
16:19
14:17
14:34
14:36
13:59
14:11

***
2019-09-13
2019-09-15
2019-09-16
2019-09-17
***
2019-09-22
2019-09-23
2019-09-25
2019-09-26
***

Turnaround time

04:25
04:20
04:18
04:22

0
1
0
0

04:19
04:22
04:21
04:19

0
0
1
0

***
days 13:46
days 12:26
days 11:49
days 13:49
***
days 13:34
days 13:35
days 14:07
days 13:58
***

traffic can be noticed for cargo and tanker vessels in the Port
of Piraeus.
PARES also provides a possibility to explore the exact
arrival departure times of a specific vessel. A subset of
features, representing the results of the PARES tool for a
single passenger vessel (HIGHSPEED 4, MMSI: 239658000)
are presented in Table I. The vessel has a regular schedule,

V. C ONCLUSION
In this work we present the Port Area Vessel Movements
(PARES) tool which validates and extracts information about
vessel movements inside the port areas. Several static and
machine learning-based data-driven techniques were presented
to detect and (to the possible extent) also correct erroneous
data. Validated Automatic Identification System (AIS) data is
used for data analytics and predictive modelling solutions, to
which the considered use-cases present significant opportunities to optimize logistic chains and reduce environmental
impacts. The proposed metrics can be used by vessel operators
and ports to express numerically their business and environmental efficiency through time and spatial dimensions, when
enabled with the obtained validated AIS data. These enhanced
information can translate into improvements to the business
intelligence at the port, allowing for better decision-making
based on more accurate data insight at a low price in what
regards data acquisition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the European Commission through the Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program under grants 769355 (PIXEL).
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Harati Mokhtari, A. Wall, P. Brooks, and J. Wang, "Automatic Identification System (AIS): Data Reliability and Human Error Implications,"
Journal of Navigation, vol. 60, pp. 373 – 389, 09 2007.
[2] R. J. Campello, D. Moulavi, and J. Sander, "Density-based clustering
based on hierarchical density estimates," in Pacific-Asia conference on
knowledge discovery and data mining. Springer, 2013, pp. 160–172.
4 https://www.ferryhopper.com/en/blog/ferry-news/strong-winds-greekferries-latest
5 https://news.gtp.gr/2019/09/17/ferry-strike-greece-announced-september24/

[3] L. Prokhorenkova, G. Gusev, A. Vorobev, A. V. Dorogush, and A. Gulin,
"Catboost: unbiased boosting with categorical features," in Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2018, pp. 6638–6648.
[4] G. Pallotta, M. Vespe, and K. Bryan, "Vessel pattern knowledge discovery from ais data: A framework for anomaly detection and route
prediction," Entropy, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2218–2245, 2013.
[5] S. Mascaro, A. E. Nicholso, and K. B. Korb, "Anomaly detection
in vessel tracks using bayesian networks," International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 84–98, 2014.
[6] S. Mao, E. Tu, G. Zhang, L. Rachmawati, E. Rajabally, and G.-B.
Huang, "An automatic identification system (ais) database for maritime
trajectory prediction and data mining," in Proceedings of ELM-2016.
Springer, 2018, pp. 241–257.
[7] D. Chen, Y. Zhao, P. Nelson, Y. Li, X. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Lang, and
X. Guo, "Estimating ship emissions based on ais data for port of tianjin,
china," Atmospheric environment, vol. 145, pp. 10–18, 2016.
[8] Y. C. Altan and E. N. Otay, "Maritime traffic analysis of the strait of
istanbul based on ais data," The Journal of Navigation, vol. 70, no. 6,
pp. 1367–1382, 2017.
[9] L. Zhang, Q. Meng, and T. F. Fwa, "Big ais data based spatial-temporal
analyses of ship traffic in singapore port waters," Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, vol. 129, pp. 287–
304, 2019.
[10] S. K. Ng, C. Loh, C. Lin, V. Booth, J. W. Chan, A. C. Yip, Y. Li,
and A. K. Lau, "Policy change driven by an ais-assisted marine
emission inventory in hong kong and the pearl river delta," Atmospheric
environment, vol. 76, pp. 102–112, 2013.

©2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted.
Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in
any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing
this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating
new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or
lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in
other works.

