Perspective: Challenges and Transformative Opportunities in Superconductor
Vortex Physics
Serena Eley,1, a) Andreas Glatz,2, 3 and Roland Willa4, 5
1) Department
2) Materials

of Physics, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado, USA
Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Avenue, Argonne, Illinois 60639,

arXiv:2105.00055v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 30 Apr 2021

USA
3) Department of Physics, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois 60115, USA
4) Theory of Condensed Matter Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
5) Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, Heidelberg, Germany
(Dated: 4 May 2021)

In superconductors, the motion of vortices introduces unwanted dissipation that is disruptive to applications. Fortunately, material defects can immobilize vortices, acting as vortex pinning centers, which engenders dramatic improvements in superconductor material properties and device operation. This has motivated decades of research into
developing methods of tailoring the disorder landscape in superconductors to increase the strength of vortex pinning.
Yet efficacious materials engineering still alludes us. The electromagnetic properties of real (disordered) superconducting materials cannot yet be reliably predicted, such that designing superconductors for applications remains a largely
inefficient process of trial and error. This is ultimately due to large gaps in our knowledge of vortex dynamics: the field
is challenged by the extremely complex interplay between vortex elasticity, vortex-vortex interactions, and material
disorder.
In this Perspective, we review obstacles and recent successes in understanding and controlling vortex dynamics
in superconducting materials and devices. We further identify major open questions and discuss opportunities for
transformative research in the field. This includes improving our understanding of vortex creep, determining and
reaching the ceiling for the critical current, advanced microscopy to garner accurate structure-property relationships,
frontiers in predictive simulations and the benefits of artificial intelligence, as well as controlling and exploiting vortices
in quantum information applications.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Distinguished for their ability to carry high dissipation-less
currents below a critical temperature Tc , superconductors are
used in motors, generators, fault-current limiters, and particle
accelerator magnets. Their impact spans beyond these examples of large-scale applications, also affecting nanoscale devices. Perhaps most renown for their key role in the quantum revolution, superconductors constitute building blocks in
current and next-generation devices for computing and sensing. For example, superconducting photons detectors feature
high-resolutions due to high kinetic inductance and a sharp
superconductor-to-normal phase transition. Moreover, superconductors can be configured to form anharmonic oscillators
that can be exploited in quantum computing.
Notwithstanding these successes, the performance of superconducting devices is often impaired by the motion of
vortices-lines threading a quantum Φ0 = h/2e of magnetic
flux through the material (see Fig. 1). Propelled by electrical currents and thermal/quantum fluctuations, vortex motion
is dissipative such that it limits the current-carrying capacity in wires, causes losses in microwave circuits, contributes
to decoherence in qubits, and can also induce phase transitions. Understanding vortex dynamics is a formidable challenge because of the complex interplay between moving vortices, material disorder that can counteract (pin) vortex motion, and thermal energy that causes vortices to escape from

a) Electronic

mail: serenaeley@mines.edu

these pinning sites. Furthermore, as depicted in Fig. 2, in
three-dimensional samples (bulk crystals or thick films), vortices are elastic objects that form complicated shapes as they
wind through the disorder landscape, reshaping and moving
under the influence of current-induced Lorentz forces.
These complexities encumber predictability: we can neither
predict technologically important parameters in superconductors nor prescribe an ideal defect landscape that optimizes
these parameters for specific applications. Though modifying
the disorder landscape, e.g. using particle-irradiation or by incorporating non-superconducting inclusions into growth precursors, can engender dramatic enhancements in the current
carrying capacity, these processes are often designed through
a trial-and-error approach. Furthermore, the optimal defect
landscape is highly-material dependent. This is because the
efficacy of pinning centers depends on the relationship between their geometry and the vortex structure, the latter being
determined by parameters of the superconductor such as the
coherence length ξ , penetration depth λ , and the anisotropy
γ, see Fig. 1. For example, though particle irradiation has
successfully doubled the critical current in cuprates and certain iron-based superconductors, the same ions and energies
do not even produce universal effects in materials belonging
to the same class of superconductors1 .
Though we can indeed tune the disorder landscape, we certainly do not have full control of it. Defects such as stacking
faults, twin boundaries, and dislocations are often intrinsic to
materials and their densities are challenging to tune. As a
further complication to understanding vortex-defect interactions, superconductors often have mixed pinning landscapes,

2
vortex

C
B

Vortex
Pinning at
the Extreme

SRF Cavities
and �uantum
Circuits

Vortex Matter
Genome
using AI

A

!
point
defect

half-loop
vortex structure
twin
boundary

E

Advanced
Vortex
Microscopy

Thermal and
�uantum
Creep

ξ

λ

D

superconducting
density

Supercurrent

FIG. 1. Frontiers in vortex matter research. Black line represents
the vortex core. Yellow region shows how the density of superconducting electron pairs decays towards the center of the core (of size
∼ ξ , coherence length). Blue plane (with arrows) represents amplitude of supercurrent, circulating around the core of radius up to the
penetration depth λ .

i.e., containing multiple types of defects. Though these landscapes immobilize vortices over a broader range of conditions
(temperatures and fields) than landscapes containing only one
type of defect, it is challenging to infer the vortex structures
that form within these materials and no techniques currently
exist to fully image these structures and vortex-defect interactions on a microscopic level.
Generally speaking, achieving a materials-by-design approach first entails garnering a sufficient microscopic understanding of vortex-defect and vortex-vortex interactions,
then incorporating these details into simulations. Significant headway has been made along these lines with the implementation of large-scale time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau
(TDGL) simulations to study vortex motion through disordered media. Spearheaded by the Argonne National Laboratory, this effort has accurately modeled critical currents Jc
in thin films (2D), layered and anisotropic 3D materials, as
well as isotropic superconductors2–6 . Additionally, it has determined the optimal shape, size, and dimensionality of defects necessary to maximize Jc , depending on the magnitude
and orientation of the magnetic field7–10 . Backed by good
agreement with experimental and analytic results for simple
geometries11–14 , the utility of the numerical routine has successfully been extended to previously unknown territories,
optimizing pinning geometries outside the scope of analytic
methods2–4,7–10,15–18 . In fact, these TDGL simulations have

columnar
defect

nanoparticle
precipitate

ab-plane

double-kink
vortex structure

staircase vortex
structure

?
void
stacking
fault

FIG. 2. Examples of vortex structures (curved blue lines) that are
predicted to form in different defect landscapes under the influence
of an applied current. Imaging these structures and defects, would
allow us to establish the crucial connection between vortex excitations, vortex-defect and vortex-vortex interactions, Lorentz forces,
and resulting vortex phases that is needed for efficacious defect engineering.

unveiled new phenomena-such as a small peak in Jc (B) at
high fields that is caused by double vortex occupancy of individual pinning sites.19 The Argonne team has even deployed
mature optimization processes based on targeted evolution using genetic algorithms.10 This is a remarkable step towards the
goal of critical-current-by-design.
A critical-current-by-design must consider thermal fluctuations, which dramatically impact the critical current due to
the effects of rapid thermally-induced vortex motion (thermal
creep). Creep, which manifests as a decay in the persistent
current over time, is rarely problematic in low-Tc superconductors as it is typically quite slow. Consequently, Nb–Ti
solenoids in magnetic resonance imaging systems can operate in persistent mode, retaining a fairly constant magnetic
field for essentially indefinite time periods. However, creep
is fast in high-Tc superconductors, restricting applications and
reducing the effective Jc .
For the sake of power and magnet applications, the goals
are clear-maximize the critical current and minimize creep.
Regarding the former, there is much room for improvement:
no superconductor containing vortices has ever achieved a Jc
higher than 25% of its theoretical maximum,
√ which is thought
to be the depairing current Jd = Φ0 /(3 3π μ0 ξ λ 2 ). Regarding creep, we are fighting a theoretical lower bound.20 This
lower bound positively correlates with a material's Ginzburg
number Gi = (γ 2 /2)(kB Tc /εsc )2 , which is the ratio of the
thermal energy to the superconducting condensation energy
εsc = (Φ20 /2π μ0 ξ 2 λ 2 )ξ 3 . The implications are grim: creep is
expected to be so fast in potential, yet-to-be-discovered roomtemperature superconductors rendering them unsuitable for
applications. The caveat is that this lower bound is limited to
low temperatures and fields (single vortex dynamics), and col-

3
lective vortex dynamics could be key to achieving slow creep
rates.
Though superconducting sensing and computing applications do not require high currents, vortices still pose a nuisance by limiting the lifetime of the quantum state in qubits21 ,
inducing microwave energy loss in resonators22 , and generally introducing noise. It is known that dissipation from vortex motion reduces the quality factor in superconducting microwave resonators, which are integral components in certain
platforms for quantum sensors and the leading solid-state architecture for quantum computing (circuit-QED)23–26 . They
are used to address and readout qubits as well as mediate coupling between multiple qubits. Consequently, resonator stability can be essential for qubit circuit stability. Moreover,
thermally activated vortex motion can contribute to 1/ f noise
and critical current fluctuations27,28 in quantum circuits and is
a suspected source of the dark count rate in superconducting
nanowire single-photon detectors29,30 .
In these quantum circuits, vortices appear due to pulsed
control fields, ambient magnetic fields31 , and the self-field
generated by bias currents30 . Mitigating the effects of vortices requires heavy shielding to block external fields and
careful circuit design to control their motion, the latter of
which is quite tricky. The circuit should include structures
to trap vortices away from operational currents and readout
as well as narrow conductor linewidths32 to make vortex formation less favorable. However, these etched structures may
exacerbate another major source of decoherence-parasitic
two-level fluctuators-defects in which ions tunnel between
two almost energetically equivalent sites, which act as dipoles
and thus interact with oscillating electric fields during device
operation.26 Hence, designing quantum circuits that are robust
to environment noise is not trivial and has become a topic of
intense interest.21,26
Despite all of the aforementioned application-limiting
problems caused by vortices, they are not pervasively detrimental to device performance. For example, vortices can trap
quasiparticles-unpaired electrons that are a third source of
decoherence in superconducting quantum circuits-boosting
the quality factor of resonators33 and the relaxation time of
qubits34 . Furthermore, vortices can host elusive, exotic modes
that are in fact useful for topological qubits, which are predicted to be robust to environmental noise that plagues other
quantum device architectures. To exploit these modes in computing, we must control the dynamics of their vortex hosts.
Hence, in general, these disparate goals of eliminating or utilizing vortices for applications both require an improved understanding of vortex formation, dynamics, and, ultimately,
control.
The goal of this Perspective is to present opportunities for
transformative advances in vortex physics. In particular, we
start by addressing vortex creep in Sec. III A, which notes
limited knowledge of non-thermal creep processes and how
recent increases in computational power will enable full consideration of creep in simulations. Second, in Sec. III B we
explore the true maximum achievable critical current, and the
need to simultaneously exploit multiple pinning mechanisms
to surpass current records for Jc . Next, Sec. III C discusses

vortex-induced losses in response to AC magnetic fields and
currents, with a focus on the impact on superconducting RF
cavities used in accelerators and quantum circuits. We examine how the quantum revolution has handled the vortex problem for computing, while sensing applications necessitate further studies. As solving the aforementioned problems requires
advanced computational algorithms, we then proceed to discuss future uses of artificial intelligence to understand the vortex matter genome in Sec. III D. Finally, in Sec. III E, we recognize that most experimental studies use magnetometry and
electrical transport studies to infer vortex-defect interactions,
and discuss the frontiers of microscopy that could lead to observing these interactions as well as accurately determining
defect densities.

II.

BACKGROUND

Superconductors have the remarkable ability to expel external magnetic fields up to a critical value Hc1 , a phenomena
that is known as the Meissner Effect. Though surpassing Hc1
quenches superconductivity in some materials, the state persists up to a higher field Hc2 = Φ0 /2π μξ 2 in type-II superconductors. In this class of materials, Hc1 can be quite small
(several mT) whereas Hc2 can be extremely large (from a few
tesla up to as high as 120 T)35 , such that the interposing state
between the lower and upper critical fields consumes much
of the phase diagram and defines the technologically relevant
regime. This mixed state hosts a lattice of vortices, whose
density scales with the magnetic field nv ∝ B. We should also
note that, in addition to globally applied fields, self-fields from
currents propagating within a superconductor can also locally
induce vortices.
Each vortex carries a single flux quantum Φ0 and the
core defines a nanoscale region through which the magnetic field penetrates the material. As such, the vortex core
is non-superconducting, of diameter 2ξ (T ), and surrounded
by circulating supercurrents of radii up to λ (T ), as depicted in Fig. 1. Given the dependence of the vortex size
on these material-dependent parameters, vortices effectively
look different in different materials-for example, they are
significantly smaller in the high-temperature superconductor
YBa2 Cu3 Oy (YBCO), where ξ (0) = 1.6 nm, than in Nb, in
which ξ (0) = 38 nm.36
Vortex motion constitutes a major source of dissipation
in superconductors. Propelled by currents of density J and
thermal/quantum energy fluctuations, vortices experience a
Lorentz force density FL = (J × B)/c accompanied by Joule
heating that weakens superconducting properties. It is this
cascading process that is responsible for the undesirable impacts on applications, for which examples were provided in
Sec. I.

A.

Fundamentals of vortex pinning

Immobilizing vortices constitutes a major research area, in
which the most prominent benchmark to assess the strength of

2

4

FIG. 3. Enhancement in Jc or M ∝ Jc in (a) an oxygen-ion-irradiated Dy2 O3 -doped commercial YBCO film grown by American Superconductor Corporation20,37 in a field of 5 T, (b) a BaZrO3 -doped (Y0.77 Gd0.23 )Ba2 Cu3 Oy film grown by Miura et al.38 , (c) a BaZrO3 -doped
BaFe2 (As1−x Px )2 film grown by Miura et al.39 , and (d) a heavy-ion-irradiated NbSe2 crystal40 . Measurements by S. Eley. Insets show
transmission electron micrographs of defect landscape, from Refs. [20, 38–40].
.

pinning is the critical current Jc .41–50 Once vortices are present
in the bulk, crystallographic defects such as point defects, precipitates, twin boundaries, stacking faults, and dislocations
provide an energy landscape to trap vortices. Depending on
the defect type and density, one of two mechanisms are typically responsible for vortex pinning: weak collective effects
from groups of small defects or strong forces exerted by larger
defects.
Originally formulated by Larkin and Ovchinnikov51 , the
theory of weak collective pinning describes how atomically
small defects alone cannot apply a sufficient force on a vortex
line to immobilize it. However, the collective action of many
can indeed pin a vortex. In the case of a random arrangement
of small, weak, and uncorrelated pinning centers, the average
force on a straight flux line vanishes. Then, only fluctuations
in the pinning energy (higher order correlations) are capable
of producing a net pinning force. Considering this, weak collective pinning theory phenomenology finds that the resulting
critical current should scale quadratically with the pin density
n p , i.e., Jc ∝ n2p , see Ref. [52].
On the other hand, strong pinning results when larger defects each plastically deform a vortex line and a low density
of these defects is sufficient to pin it. Competition between
the bare pinning force f p and the vortex elasticity C̄ generates
multi-valued solutions. Because of this, a proper averaging of
the effective force h fpin i from individual pins is non-zero and
results in a critical current Jc = n p h fpin i. Here, the critical current reached by strong pins depends linearly on the defect density. While conceptually simpler than weak collective pinning,
it has taken significantly longer to develop a strong pinning
formalism. With its completion in the early 2000s, the formalism enabled computing numerous physical observables,
including the critical current53,54 , the excess-current characteristic55–60 , and the ac Campbell response11–14 .
Defects merely trap the vortex state into a metastable min-

imum. Thermal and quantum fluctuations release vortices
from pinning sites, and this activated motion of vortices from a
pinned state to a more stable state is called vortex creep. In the
presence of creep, the critical current Jc is no longer a distinct
boundary separating a dissipation-free regime from a dissipative one. Experimentally, this manifests as a power-law transition V = J n between the superconducting state in which V = 0
and Ohmic behavior. The creep rate S ≡ −d ln(J)/d ln(t) then
becomes ∝ 1/n and can be assessed by fitting the transitional
regime in the current-voltage characteristic or measuring the
temporal decay of an induced persistent current. Measurements of the vortex creep rate also provide access to microscopic details such as the effective energy barriers U ∗ = T /S
surmounted and whether single vortices or bundles are creeping.
Various methods of tailoring the disorder landscape in
superconductors have proven successful in remarkably enhancing the critical current. Figure 3 shows examples of
cuprates, iron-based superconductors, and low-Tc materials
that have all benefited from incorporating inclusions. Defects can be added post-growth, using techniques such as
particle irradiation,1,20,37,61–84 or during the growth process
by incorporating impurities to the source material.38,85–89
Though these processes induce markedly different disorder
landscapes, both can effectuate remarkable increases in Jc .
However, the conditions necessary to improve electromagnetic properties are highly material-dependent-this lack of
universality renders defect landscape engineering a process of
trial-and-error.
Particle irradiation can induce point defects (vacancies, interstitial atoms, and substitutional atoms), larger random defects, or correlated disorder (e.g., amorphous tracks known as
columnar defects). Notably, the critical current in commercial
YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ coated conductors was nearly doubled through
irradiation with protons69 , oxygen-ions37,39 , gold-ions90 , and

5
silver-ions. Furthermore, iron-based superconductors have
also been shown to benefit from particle irradiation1 . To incorporate larger defects, such as nanoparticle inclusions, numerous groups38,87,91–94 have introduced excess Ba and M
(where M= Zr, Nb, Sn, or Hf) into growth precursors. This
results in the formation of randomly distributed 5-20 nm sized
non-superconducting BaMO3 nanoparticles or nanorods. This
method has produced critical currents that are up to seven
times higher than that in films without inclusions,95 therefore,
has become one of the leading schemes for enhancing Jc .
The enhancement achieved by inclusions and irradiation is
often restricted to a narrow temperature and field range, partially because ξ and λ are temperature dependent, whereas
the defect sizes and densities are fixed. Another reason for
the limited range of the enhancement is that, under the right
conditions, certain fast moving vortex excitations may form.
For example, in materials containing parallel columnar defects, double-kink excitations form at low fields and moderate
temperatures that result in fast vortex creep concomitant with
reduced Jc .96 Mixed pinning landscapes, composed of different types of defects, can indeed enhance Jc over a broader
temperature and field range than inclusions of only one type
and one size. More work is indeed necessary to optimize this.
B.

Thermally activated vortex motion

Vortex creep is a very complex phenomenon due to the interplay between vortex-vortex interactions, vortex-defect interactions, vortex elasticity, and anisotropy.52,9798 These interactions determine Uact (T, H, J), a generally unknown regimedependent function. The simplest creep model, proposed Anderson and Kim, neglects the microscopic details of pinning
centers and considers vortices as non-interacting rigid objects
hopping out of potential wells of depth Uact ∝ U p |1 − J/Jc |.
However, as elastic objects, the length of vortices can increase over time under force from a current and vortex-vortex
interactions are non-negligible at high fields. As such, the
Anderson-Kim model's relevance is limited to low temperatures and fields.
At high temperatures and fields, collective creep theories,
which consider vortex elasticity, predict an inverse power
law form for the current-dependent energy barrier Uact (J) =
U p [(Jc /J)μ − 1], where μ is the so-called glassy exponent
that is related to the size and dimensionality of the vortex
bundle that hops during the creep process99 . To capture behavior across regimes, the interpolation formula Uact (J) =
(U p /μ) [(Jc /J)μ − 1] is commonly used, where μ → −1 recovers the Anderson-Kim prediction. Combining this interpolation formula with the creep time t = t0 eUact (J)/kB T , we
find the persistent current should decay over time as J(t) =
Jc0 [1 + (μkB T /U p ) ln(t/t0 )]−1/μ and that the thermal vortex
creep rate is
S≡

d ln J
kB T
=
,
d lnt
U p + μkB T ln(t/t0 )

(1)

where ln(t/t0 ) ∼ 25-30. Because the magnetization M ∝ J,
creep can easily be measured by capturing the decay in the

magnetization over time using a magnetometer. Moreover, as
seen from Eq. (1), knowledge of S(T, H) provides access to
both U p and μ. Hence, creep measurements are a vital tool
for revealing the size of the energy barrier, its dependence on
current, field, and temperature, and whether the dynamics are
glassy or plastic. It is important to note that Eq. (1) is typically
used to analyze creep data piecewise-it can rarely be fit to the
entire temperature range. Creep rates are not predictable and
no analytic expression exists that broadly captures the temperature and field dependence of creep. Both U p and μ have
unknown temperature dependencies, which is a major gap in
our ability to predict vortex creep rates.

C.

Predictive vortex matter simulations

Simulating the the behavior of vortex matter52,100–104 has
a long history. Though the value of such simulations was
realized long ago105,106 , the efficacy to produce accurate results in materials containing complex defect landscapes is
considered a recent success, tied to improvements in computational power. Specifically, we can now numerically
solve more realistic models, ranging from Langevin dynamics to time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) equations to
fully microscopic descriptions, including Usadel and Eilenberger, Bogoliubov-de Gennes, and non-equilibrium KeldyshEilenberger quantum transport equations. While the phenomenological TDGL equations describe vortex matter realistically on lengths scales above the superconducting coherence
lengths, full microscopic equations are needed to describe,
e.g., the vortex core accurately. This, however, means that the
system sizes, which can be simulated down to the nanoscale
using microscopic models, are quite limited, while TDGL can
simulate macroscopic behavior including most dynamical features of vortex matter.
The Langevin approach only considers vortex degrees of
freedom, while mostly neglecting elasticity and vortex-vortex
interactions, which are nonlocal effects. Hence, its accuracy
is limited to when inter-vortex separations are significantly
larger than ξ , vortex pinning sites are dilute, or the superconducting host is sufficiently thin that vortices can be considered 2D particles. Nevertheless, this simple picture reveals
remarkably rich, dynamical behavior – notably realizing a dependence of Jc on the strength and density of pinning centers
105,106 , thermal activation of vortices from pinning sites107 , a
crossover between plastic and elastic behavior108,109 , and dynamic ordering of vortex lattices at large velocities110,111 .
However, vortex elasticity is indeed an influential parameter in bulk systems. It results in vortex phases that are characterized by complex vortex structures, glassy phases that do
not exist in 2D systems, as well as other interesting characteristics112–118 . Herein lies the strength of the TDGL approach,
which is a good compromise between complexity and fidelity.
It describes the full behavior of the superconducting order parameter119 and therefore represents a 'mesoscopic bridge' between microscopic and macroscopic scales. Notably, it surpasses the Langevin approach by (i) describing all essential
properties of vortex dynamics, including inter-vortex interac-

6

(b)

00

0.1

0.5

Jc [Jcdp] dp

0.06

44

−0.69

Dy0.75 Jc ∝ B
-0.69
0.75 c
−0.80
No background inclusions
-0.74 Jc ∝ B
0.5
c inclusions J ∝ B −0.68
With background
c
-0.80
−1
c
10
-0.68
c

Dy ; J ∝ B
Dy ; J ∝ B
direct sim; J ∝ B
+ background ; J ∝ B

0.04
0.04

(c)

3.7

3.7

2.96

2.2

2.22

exp

J [J ]

0.08
0.08

33

−0.74

c

1.48

Jc [MA/cm2]

B [T] B [T]
22
Dy
J ∝ exp
B
11

Jc [ MA/cm 2 ]

(a)

−2

10

−2

−1

10

10

sim

0.02

000 sim
0

0.05

0.1
0.1
B [Hc2]

B [Hc2]

0.15

0.7

0.74

0

0.2
0.2

FIG. 4. (a) 3D STEM tomogram of a 0.5 Dy-doped YBCO sample. Image processing is discussed in Ref. [37]. (b) Critical current Jc
as a function of the magnetic field B applied along the c-axis of YBCO. The simulated field dependence (circles, red curve) with only the
nanoparticles observed by STEM tomography in the sample with 0.5 Dy doping exhibits almost the same exponent α, for Jc ∝ B−α , as the
experiment (triangles, green curve). Adding 2ξ diameter inclusions to the simulation makes the dependence less steep (squares, blue curve),
which yields an exponent very similar to the experimental one in the sample with 0.75 Dy doping (stars, yellow curve). (c) Snapshot of the
TDGL vortex configuration with applied magnetic field and external current for the same defect structure as in the experiment (a). Isosurfaces
of the order parameter close to the normal state are shown in red and follow both vortex and defect positions. The amplitude of the order
parameter is represented on the backplane of the volume where blue corresponds to maximum order parameter amplitude. Arrows indicate the
experimental and simulated Jc dependencies.

tions with crossing and reconnection events, (ii) possessing
a rigorous connection to the microscopic Bardeen-CooperSchrieffer theory in the vicinity of the critical temperature120 ,
and (iii) considering realistic pinning mechanisms. Regarding
pinning, it can specifically account for pinning due to modulation of critical temperature (δ Tc -pinning) or mean-free path
(δ `-pinning), strain, magnetic impurities121 , geometric pinning through appropriate boundary conditions, and, generally,
weak to strong pinning regimes-all beyond the reach of the
Langevin approach. Consequently, the TDGL formulation is
arguably one of the most successful physical models, describing the behavior of many different physical systems, even beyond superconductors122 .
In its early days, the TDGL approach was used to study depinning, plastic, and elastic steady-state vortex motion in systems containing twin and grain boundaries as well as both regular and irregular arrays of point or columnar defects.123,124
Those simulations were predominately used to illustrate the
complex dynamics of individual vortices because computational limitations prohibited the study of large-scale systems
with collective vortex dynamics. Only later did simulation of
about a hundred vortices in two-dimensional systems become
possible, resulting in predictions for, e.g., the field dependence
of Jc in thin films with columnar defects125 .
A 2002 article by Winiecki and Adams126 deserves credit
as one of the first simulation-based studies of vortex matter
in three-dimensional superconductors that produced a realistic electromagnetic response. Later, in 2015, Koshelev et al.7
achieved a major technical breakthrough by investigating optimal pinning by monodispersed spherical inclusions. The simulated system size of 100ξ ×100ξ ×50ξ was much larger than
any previously studied system, enabling even more realistic

simulations of the collective vortex dynamics than previous
works. Their computational approach is based on an optimized parallel solver for the TDGL equation127 , which allows
for simulating vortex motion and determining the resulting
electrical transport properties in application-relevant systems.
The efficacy of this technique is best demonstrated in a study3
that applied the same approach to a 'real' pinning landscape
by incorporating scanning transmission electron microscopy
tomography data of Dy-doped YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ films128,129 ,
and the results showed almost quantitative agreement of the
field and angular dependent critical current with experimental
transport measurements, see Fig. 4.
Finally, we discuss applying TDGL calculations to commercial high-temperature superconducting tapes, which typically consist of rare earth (RE) or yttrium barium copper oxide (REBCO) matrices. Specifically, Ref. [8] simulated vortex dynamics in REBCO coated conductors containing selfassembled BaZrO3 nanorods, and reported good quantitative
match to experimental measurements of Jc versus the applied
magnetic field-angle θ . Most notably, the simulations demonstrated the non-additive effect of defects: adding irradiated
columnar defects at a 45◦ angle with the nanorod (c-) axis removes the Jc (θ = 0◦ ) peak of the nanorods and generates a
peak at θ = 45◦ instead. This study then went beyond simply reproducing experimental behavior, and predicted the optimal concentrations of BaZrO3 nanorods that are necessary
to maximize Jc , which it found to be 12-14% of Jd (at specific θ )-far higher than had been experimentally achieved in
similar systems. This approach is certainly more efficient than
the standard trial-and-error approach, growing and measuring
samples with a large variety of defect landscape.
These recent successes in accurately predicting Jc in super-

7
conductors based on the microstructure highlight how close
we are to the ultimate goal of tailoring pinning landscapes
for specific applications with well-defined critical current requirements. Constituting the new critical-current-by-design
paradigm,18,104 the routine use of TDGL simulations for efficient defect landscape optimization is a transformative opportunity in vortex physics, as is expanding these computational
successes to include the use of artificial intelligence algorithms. Furthermore, microscopic and far-from-equilibrium
simulations of vortex matter beyond the TDGL approach require significant computational resources and are only now
becoming feasible. We will discuss related developments in
Sec. III D.

III.
A.

TRANSFORMATIVE OPPORTUNITIES
Vortex Creep

In this section, we identify major opportunities to accelerate our understanding of thermally-activated vortex hopping
(thermal creep) and non-thermal tunneling (quantum creep)
between pinning sites. Only limited situations are amenable
to an analytic treatment of vortex creep: these include thermal
depinning of single vortices and vortex bundles in the regime
of weak collective pinning. In the strong pinning regime, e.g.,
for columnar defects, we must consider complicated excitations that form during the depinning process. Activation occurs via half-loop formation130 , which is depicted in Fig. 2.
During this process, the vortex nucleates outside of its pinned
position, and the curved unpinned segment grows over time
as a current acts on it, until the entire vortex eventually leaves
the pinning site. Because half-loop formation likely occurs in
a range of high-current-carrying materials, which may contain
amorphous tracks, nanorods, or twin boundaries, numerical
treatment of vortex creep within the strong pinning framework
is of significant interest.
The first task involves studying creep of isolated vortices,
pinned by a single strong inclusion or columnar defect. In accordance with analytic predictions, an increase in temperature
shifts the characteristic depinning current below Jc , rounds the
IV curves and affects the excess-current characteristic far beyond Jc 58–60 . The next steps will involve studying multiple
vortices, more defects, and mixed defect landscapes, which
will indeed increase the complexity of the problem, warranting computational assistance.
Recent advances in computational power and highperformance codes will enable tackling these challenges,
which involve long simulation times at exponentially low dynamics. Instead of simulating the thermal relaxation of a
metastable configuration in a single 'linear' simulation, the
same configuration can be simulated in parallel, i.e., experiencing fluctuations along different 'world lines'. This accelerates the search for a rare depinning event, after which parallel
computations are interrupted and restarted from new depinned
configurations.
In a 2017 paper20 , we found that the minimum achievable
thermal creep rate in a material depends on its Ginzburg num-

ber Gi as S ∼ Gi1/2 (T /Tc ), shown in Fig. 5. Our result is
limited to the Anderson-Kim regime and considered pinning
scenarios with analytically determined pinning energies UP .
It also somewhat gravely predicts that there is a limit to how
much creep problem in high-Tc superconductors, which tend
to have high Gi, can be ameliorated, such that we may expect the performance of yet-to-be discovered room temperature superconductors to be irremediably hindered by creep.
However, YBCO films containing nanoparticles demonstrate
non-monotonic temperature-dependent creep rates S(T ), such
that S dips to unexpectedly low values at intermediate temperatures outside of the Anderson-Kim regime20 . This dip,
thought to be induced by strong pinning from nanoparticles,
suggests that collective pinning regimes may hold the key to
inducing slower creep rates that dip below our proposed lower
limit in the Anderson-Kim regime. A numerical tacking of the
vortex creep problem would improve our theoretical understanding of creep and answer a major open question in vortex
physics – what is indeed the slowest achievable creep rate in
different superconductors?
Our finding of the lower limit to the creep rate reduces the
guesswork in trial-and-error approaches to optimizing the disorder landscape and improves our ability to select a material
for applications requiring slow creep. Yet, ultimately, a material's quantum creep rate actually sets its minimum achievable creep rate. This is a regime that is has received relatively little attention-there have been few theoretical and
experimental studies of quantum creep. Theoretical models
are limited to tunneling barriers induced by weak collective
pinning99,131 and columnar defects,132 though most materials
have very complex, mixed pinning landscapes. Most experimental work has focused on cuprates, determining a crossover
temperature of ∼ 8.5-11 K in YBCO films,133–135 , 1.5-2 K in
YBCO crystals,134,136 5-6 K in Tl2 Ba2 CaCu2 O8 films,136,137 ,
17 K in TlBa2 CaCu2 O7−δ ,133 30 K in HgBa2 CaCu2O6+δ .133
Klein et al.138 studied an iron-based superconductor, finding
crossover around 1 K in Fe(Te,Se). No studies have been conducted in materials containing inclusions nor using any systematic tuning of the energy barrier.
Furthermore, the crossover between the thermal and quantum creep is unclear. As previously mentioned, the AndersonKim model's relevancy is limited to low temperatures kB T 
U p in which S is expected to increase approximately linearly
with temperature. A linear fit to this regime often extrapolates to non-zero S at T = 0, suggestive of non-thermal creep.
In fact, it is common to perfunctorily attribute this extrapolation to quantum creep without conducting measurements in
the quantum creep regime. However, there are compelling discrepancies between typical experimental results in this context
and theory. For example, theory predicts that the tunneling
probability should decrease with bundle size, whereas experiments often observe the opposite trend (positive correlation
between low temperature S and field)139 . Theory also predicts a quadratic, rather than linear, temperature-dependent
S(T → 0)136,139 . That is, quantum creep may be thermally
assisted99 , and not simply present itself as a temperatureindependent creep rate at low temperatures. An even more
confounding result is that Nicodemi et al.140 predicted non-

LETTERS
0.04

8
NATURE MATERIALS DOI: 10.1038/NMAT4840
Ba1−xKxFe2As2 x = 0.4

T/Tc = 1/4
μ0H = 1.0 T

YBa2Cu3O7−
Ca1−xNaxFe2As2 x = 0.4

Ca1−xNaxFe2As2
x = 0.75

Ca1−xNaxFFe2As2 x = 0.11

FeSe

0.03

FeTe1−xSex x = 0.4

Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2
x = 0.075

S

x = 0.08
0.02

S=

BaFe2−xRuxAs2
x = 0.7

)
/T c
1/2 (T
i
G

x = 0.075
V3Si

0.01

Ca1−xNaxFe2As2
x = 0.5
NbSe2

FeSe
(K, Ba)BiO3

Ba1−xKxFe2As2 x = 0.4
x = 0.08

LiFeAs
BaFe2(As1−xPx)2
x = 0.33

NbTi
MgB2
0.00

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

Gi1/2

Figure 4 | The universal lower limit for creep. Creep at reduced temperature T/Tc = 1/4 and field of μ0 H = 1 T for di�erent superconductors
plotted versus
FIG. 5. Creep at reduced temperature T /T = 1/4 and a field of μ0 H = 1 T for different superconductors plotted versus Gi1/2 . The open
Gi1/2 . See Supplementary Tables 1–3 for more details cand Supplementary Fig.
1 for a similar comparison at μ0 H = 0.3 T. The open symbols indicate
symbols indicate materials for which the microstructure has been modified either by irradiation or incorporation of inclusions. The solid grey
1/2 (T /T
materials forline
which
the microstructure
has
modified
by either irradiation or incorporation of inclusions. The solid grey line represents the limit set by
represents
the limit set by
Gibeen
c ). The result predicts that the creep problem even in yet-to-be-discovered high-Tc superconductors
1/2
Gi1/2 T/Tc = Gi
We have
Tc /4operating
because temperatures.
it is a low temperature
where
the Anderson–Kim
description
is typically
valid, and2017,
μ0 H = 1 T
may /4.
counteract
thechosen
benefitsTof=high
Material from
S. Eley,
et al. Nat. Mater.
16, 409–413
(2017). Copyright
Publishing
Group.
because it isNature
the lowest
field for
which a large amount of S data is available in the literature. By connecting the data for Ba(Fe1 x Cox )2 As2 (x = 0.075 and
x = 0.08) collected before and after two di�erent irradiation processes, the broad blue lines highlight examples of samples for which systematic
modifications of the microstructure have tuned S towards the limit.
rate on material parameters in superconductors would fill a
zero creep rates at T = 0 using Monte Carlo simulations based
major
in ourcore
understanding
of vortexStrong
physics.pinning
This would
on
a
purely
classical
vortex
model
and
reconciled
it
with
nonabove this field, the vortex population is high enough that BZO of
thegap
vortex
that is pinned.
can occur in
significantly
contribute
towards
a
comprehensive
model ofinclusion of
equilibrium
dynamics.
becomes effective in slowing creep as it offers more pinning sites defects of dimensions ⇠⇠ or larger. For an insulating
vortex
dynamics,
reveal whether
creep
mayis,induce
mea- of semi
has also
been ofsuggested
that the
theBa122:P
overall film.
meato immobilizeIta higher
fraction
vortices than
size
equal
to theand
coherence
volume,
that
an ellipsoid
surable effects in quantum circuits, which typically operate at 3
sured creep rate is simply the sum of the thermal and
From comparing
our results with other studies, we find that creep axes
⇠ab and
⇠c = ⇠ab / such that VP ⌘ Vcoh ⇠ (4⇡/3)⇠ab / , we
quantum components.133 However, in some iron-based
millikelvin
temperatures.
2 3
in the Ba122:P
film
is
not
only
remarkably
slow,
but
is
in
fact
the
obtain
U
⌘
U
67,141
P
coh
c ⇠ab /6 ; thus, in the Anderson–Kim regime,
p⇠ H1/2
superconductors,
S is fairy insensitive to T or even deslowest measured
rate in any
to date
(Fig.
3a). Prior
S ⇠ (T /UP ) ⇠ 6 2Gi (T /Tc ), once again proportional to Gi1/2 .
creases creep
with increasing
T Fe-SC
up to fairly
high
fractions
of Tto
c.
this study, Hence,
we hadeither
speculated
creep
for othercomponent
Fe-SCs seemed
obvious
strategy
to minimize
S is to increase
Up by increasing
quantumthat
creep
is a significant
at surB. The
Pinning
at the
extreme:
Can the critical
current reach
5–10
surprisinglyprisingly
fast ,high
which
raised anorimportant
question:
precisely
the
of current?
the core that is pinned. For a defect of dimensions
the length
depairing
temperatures
the creep rate
dramatically
dewhat shouldcreases
we expect
and how much
can we go?base temper- bigger than ⇠ and arbitrary shape, VP ⇠ 2⇡⇠ab2 Lz ⇠ (3/2) (Lz /⇠c ) Vcoh ,
at temperatures
below lower
the measurement
ature,
motivating
the needincluding
for lower the
temperature
meaGi dictates
various
properties,
width ofcreep
the critiwhere
⇠c constituting
is the size the
along
the field direction
(see Fig. 2c)
Cooper
pairs
dissipationless
current in sup Lz >
surements.
with
resistivity
cal fluctuation
regionSuperconductors
around Tc (that
is,high
1Tnormal-state
the and
2⇠ is the
core
radius.
There energy
is, however,
a limit
perconductors
will vortex
dissociate
when
their kinetic
surc ⇠ GiTc , setting
ξ , such as high-Tctransition
cuprates, are
the best
n and
lower limitρfor
thelow
superconducting
width
for candidates
a crystal- to
this their
approach
by the Theoretically,
elastic properties
of vortex
matter,
passes
bindingsetenergy.
this could
be
11,19
forperfect
having measurable
quantum
creepmelting
rates. This
is because
achievedare
by not
a sufficiently
high by
current,
the depairing
lographically
sample) and
the vortex
transition
. which
considered
the termed
Anderson–Kim
model. This
effective
quantum
rateitishas
predicted
to beperfunctory can
current,
is recognized
as the
theoretical
d . Consequently,
It is knownthethat
Gi will
impactcreep
S and
become
be Jeasily
visualizedJdby
considering
a vortex
pinned in a
(
maximum achievable
Jc , such
that it
Jc /J
often equated
with
p
d isdepin
to mention an estimate
of
Gi
(refs
6,20–23)
when
characterizing
columnar
defect,
from
which
can
by
producing
a half−(e2 ρn /h̄ξ ) Jc /Jd ,
if Lc < a0
the
efficiency
η
of
the
vortex
pinning
landscape,
which
may
vortex dynamics,
but
a
testable
formula
has
not
been
developed.
loop
of
length
`
⇠
⇠
(J
/J
)
along
the
columnar
defect
(Fig.
2c).
Sq =
hl
c 0
2 ρ /h̄λ )(a /λ )4 (a /ξ )9 (J /J )9/2 , if L > a
36
−(e
be
confusing
as
a
perfect
defect
would
not
produce
J
=
J
.
n
c
c
0
0
0
c
d
d
In pursuit of such a formula, we now review how vortices depin Even for an arbitrarily long columnar defect, the effective Lz
most successful efforts to carefully
tune the defect
(2)
from various pinning centres (applicable to crystals, films, devices
is The
truncated
by `hl so VP ⇠ 2⇡⇠ab2 `hl142,143
. For
J ⇠ Jc , the activation
landscape obtain Jc /J
of
only
20-30%.
As exemplid
2 3
and wires).where
We restrict
ourselves
to
the
early
stages
of
the
depinning
energy
U
(J
)
⇠
(4⇡/
)H
⇠
(J
/J
)(1
J
/J
)
(ref.Fig.
25)6,resulting in
act
0
c
c
ab have measured, see
p a series of1/2samplesc we
Lc is the length of the vortex segment (or bundle) that
fied by
process (J ⇠
J
),
low
T
(where
U
is
nearly
temperature
indepenS
⇠
4
2(J
/J
)Gi
(T
/T
).
52
c
p
c
0
c
most samples produce Jc /Jd < 5%, whereas Jc /Jd is routunnels . Determining the dependence of the quantum creep

dent) and low H (single-vortex regime (sv)). Vortex lines can be
pinned either by the collective action of many weak pins or the
independent action of strong pins24 . First considering the most pervasive defect, point defects are weak pins that will provide sufficient
pinning only when acting collectively. Here, Jc ⌘ Jsv is highest and
11

2

3

1/2

For randomly distributed nanoparticles of radius R ⇠(T = 0),
with increasing J the tips of the pinned vortex slide along the
surface of the nanoparticle until they meet near the equator and
reconnect, leading to depinning of the vortex26 (Fig. 2c). As J decays
during relaxation, the two tips progressively separate. While J ⇠ Jc ,

9

Irradiated

BaHfO3

O
Pb
O
BaFe2(As1-xPx)2
+ BaZrO3

Nb

FeSe0.5Te0.5
NbSe2

NbN

BaZrO3

BaSnO3

MgB2

BaFe2(As1-xPx)2
Hg1201

Commercial
YBa2Cu3O7-d

(Y,Gd)Ba2Cu3O7-d

Material
FIG. 6. Critical current Jc normalized to the depairing current for
various superconductors at T = 5 K and μ0 H = 0.3 T. The data includes Dy2 O3 -doped YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ commercial coated conductors
and BMO3 -doped Y0.77 Gd0.33 Ba2 Cu3 O7−δ films (where M = Sn,
Zr, or Hf), all grown via metal organic deposition.

tinely higher for coated conductors (REBCO films). Though
this at first appears to be a far cry from the ultimate goal,
some surmise that this is indeed near the maximum that can
be achieved by immobilizing vortices by means of core pinning, which merely refers to a vortex preferentially sitting
in potential wells defined by a defect to minimize the energy of its core. Wimbush et al.36 present a compelling argument that core pinning can obtain a maximum Jc /Jd of only
30%-A current equivalent √
to Jd would produce a √
Lorentz
force fd = Jd Φ0 = 4Bc Φ0 /3 6μ0 λ , with Bc = Φ0 /2 2πλ ξ
the thermodynamic critical field. At the same time, the condensation energy εsc produces a characteristic pinning force
f pcore ∼ εsc /ξ ≈ πξ 2 B2c /2μ0 , such that the ratio of the maximal core pinning force to the depairing Lorentz force is
√
f pcore / fd = 3 3/16 ≈ 32%.
(3)
Similarly, Matsushita144 performed a more precise calculation
by considering the effects of the geometry of the flux line, and
found that f pcore / fd ≈ 28%. Hence, decades of work in designing the defect landscape to pin vortex cores may have indeed
nearly accomplished the maximum efficiency achievable by
means of core pinning.
If the ultimate goal of Jc = Jd cannot be obtained by core
pinning alone, are there other mechanisms to immobilize vortices that could indeed produce Jc /Jd > 30%? Magnetic interactions between vortices themselves or vortices and magnetic
inclusions can also restrict the motion of a vortex-referred to
as magnetic pinning. Herein lies a transformative opportunity
to make large strides towards approaching Jc = Jd . Magnetic
pinning alone or in combination with core pinning may produce unprecedentedly high values for Jc , though this mechanism has received considerably less attention than core pinning because it is quite complicated to actualize.
A high density of vortices tend to arrange themselves into a
hexagonal lattice, and one pinned to a defect via core pinning

may restrict the motion of its neighbors, subsequently affecting its neighbors' neighbors due to magnetic vortex-vortex interactions, which occur over a length scale of λ . A magnetic
inclusion provides another opportunity for inflicting magnetic
and core pinning on a vortex. Again, following the arguments
of Wimbush36 , we can compare the pinning force induced by
core pinning to that ofR magnetic pinning. The magnetic Zeeman energy εmag = 21 A M * B dA produced by a strong ferromagnet is much greater than the condensation energy and may
be several orders of magnitude greater than the core pinning
energy. However, it is unclear whether the resulting pinning
force is greater because it occurs over the longer length scale
of λ versus ξ , i.e., f pmag ∼ εmag /λ , such that
√
(4)
f pmag / f pcore ≈ 2 2(μ0 M/Bc ).
Hence, the advantage depends on the ratio of the magnetization of the pinning site to the thermodynamic critical field.
Independent of whether f pmag surpasses f pcore , concomitant
mechanisms would produce an additive effect that may surpass current record values of Jc . Yet, ferromagnets in proximity to superconductors can locally degrade superconductivity by inducing pair breaking, such that it is challenging
to incorporate ferromagnetic vortex pinning centers without
compromising the superconducting state. This complication
combined with the typical materials science considerations of
incorporating inclusions that do not induce too much strain
on the surrounding superconducting matrix will make this a
challenge all but insurmountable.
In addition to magnetic pinning, exploiting geometric pinning provides another potentially transformative opportunity
to dramatically boost Jc in superconductors. In clean, narrow
(sub-micron) superconducting strips, geometric restrictions
can induce self-arrest of vortices recovering the dissipationfree state at high fields and temperatures due to surface/edge
(Bean-Livingston barrier)41 or geometric42–45 pinning. Figure 7 depicts an example of geometric vortex pinning around
two superconducting strips.
Moreover, at a fixed applied current, the magnetoresistance
(MR) shows oscillations with increasing magnetic field, indicating the penetration of complete vortex rows into the system16 . Therefore, these MR oscillations are a way to determine the vortex structure in nanoscale superconductors. At
very high fields, the vortex lattice in these strips starts to melt.
Combining magnetoresistance measurements and numerical
simulations can then relate those MR oscillations to the penetration of vortex rows with intermediate geometrical pinning,
where the vortex lattice remains unchanged, and uncover the
details of geometrical melting. This opens the possibility to
control vortices in geometrically restricted nanodevices and
represents a novel technique of 'geometrical spectroscopy'.
Combined use of MR measurements and large-scale simulations would reveal detailed information of the structure of the
vortex system. A similar re-entrant behavior was observed in
superconducting strips in a parallel field configuration: Here,
high fields lead to 'vortex crowding', in which a higher density of vortex lines starts to straighten, therefore reducing the
Lorenz force on the vortices. The result is an intermediate
dissipation-less state145 .

introduction 5
10

d
2w

H
FIG. 7. Field profile in a double-strip geometry before penetration of vortices45 . The arrangement and geometry (e.g. width w and
thickness d) of the specimen significantly influence the relative importance of Bean-Livingston, geometric and bulk pinning. Material
tical stacks of (in-plane) Josephson vortices favor the
from R. Willa, ETH Zurich Research Collection, see Ref. [146].

highest possible uniformity. Both of these aspects are part of
the critical-current-by-design paradigm104 . We will describe
these in a more general context in section III D. Taking adFigure 1.1: Geometry of the
vantage of the modern computational approaches described
double
strip, subject
to experiments
a perthere
in combination
with
opens novel pathways
pendicular
magnetic
field H.
to
new materials
for large-field
applications, in particular the
use
material instead of more traTheof high-T
superconducting
strips
c superconducting
ditional
choice
of
elemental
Nb
or
(green) of width 2w and thick- Nb-based compounds.
ness d are separated by a gap
2s. Superconducting
Field lines are RF
shown
in and Quantum Circuits
C.
cavities
orange for the system in the
Meissner
state.
1.
Superconducting
RF cavities

Most studies of vortex dynamics in superconductors are
conducted using DC currents and static magnetic fields. Yet,
the need to understand vortex dynamics under AC magnetic
penetration
pancake
vortices
fields or ACofcurrents
is rapidly
increasing, as these are the opby locally suppressing the superconducting order parameter.
a macroscopic
eratingOn
conditions
e.g. for level,
superconducting radio frequency
(SRF)
and quantum
the geometric barrier has been observed to be suppressed
in cavities
the oblique
field. circuits
The for sensing and computing.
Superconductors
are
desirable
The
situation
becomes
more
complex
when
one
considers
analysis of an arrangement of parallel strips separated by narrow gaps (simulating for RF devices because
the minimal resistance enables very high quality factors Q, a
nanosized superconducting strips and bridges, in which vorthepinning
Josephson
vortex
stacks)
then
is a first
step and
towardsmetric
the understanding
thesestorage with low losses and
that indicates highofenergy
tex
is dictated
by an
intricate
interplay
of surface
experimental
narrow bandwidths. SRF cavities are used in current and nextbulk
pinning. Asfindings.
described above, in the case of a very narrow
generation
for particle
accelerators used in, e.g., high
bridge,
Jc is mostly
by its surface barrier
barrier, whereas
We first
presentdefined
the geometrical
analysisinof the
doubledesigns
strip when
results
energy physics. In addition to Q, the maximum accelerating
the opposite case of very wide strips, it is dominated by its
are derived for vanishing sample thickness with the real thickness
d serving as a cuto↵
field, Ea , is another important metric for SRF cavity perforbulk pinning properties. However, understanding the intermeparameter.
This
traditional
description
breaks
down
when
the
gap
width
2s between
mance. The goal
is often
to maximize Q at low drive powers,
diate regime, where the critical current is determined both by
which
is essential
for large inside
accelerating fields and reduced debulk
pinningdrops
and bybelow
the Bean-Livingston
barrier at the
of
the strips
the sample thickness
d. edge
Analyzing
the field
configuration
mands
on cryogenic systems
that are responsible for cooling
aand
stripclose
is of great
interest
in small
structures
to the
gap with
thesuperconducting
help of a Schwarz-Christo↵el
transformation,
we have
the cavities. Similarly, higher Ea is desirable, as it indicates
and wires.
found
and
studied
a new
regime:
in this
limit,
geometric
barrier for
vortex
entry
6 revealed
larger reachable
particle
energies.
Recent
studies
that
while bulk
defects
arrestthe
voris suppressed
vanishes
drops
below d. The
penetrated
state
still
Elemental
niobium
(Nb)isand
Nb-based compounds are the
tex
motion awayand
fromfinally
the edges,
defects when
in theirsclose
vicinity
material
of choice
forthe
all current
promote
vortex penetration,
thusdome
suppressing
the critical
characterized
by a vortex
surrounded
by curvortex-free
regions,
and
barrieraccelerator applications. Advances in the fabrication of Nb-cavities have pushed their
rent.
This phenomenon
also quiteexit
important
the study the
of field.
reappears
to protectis vortex
upon inlowering
The magnetic response
performance to extraordinary levels148,149 , with Q-values apsuperconducting radio-frequency cavities. Furthermore, the
11 andcases,
remains
irreversible
and exhibits
feature.proaching
For all the
above
2 × 10
Ea in we
excess of 45 MV/m in Nb150 ,
role
of defects
near the penetrating
edgea isshoulder-like
asymmetric comhave
verified
that
corrections
arising
from
the
magnetic
response
of
the
Shubnikov
and
E
∼
17
MV/m
for
Nb
Sn
resonators. In both cases, the
pared to the exit edge of a superconducting strip. This coma
3
magnetic
field
reached
is
above
plex
interplay
of
bulk
and
edge
pinning
open
new
opportuniphase [60] in the penetrated state are small and can be omitted. Extending thethe lower critical field of the
material, but below the theoretically predicted superheating
ties for tailored pinning structure for a given application. In
analysis to multiple strips (n 3), we have determinedfield,
the specific
sequence of flux
at which vortices would spontaneously penetrate even a
the simple case of the straight strip with similar-type spherical
penetrations
into
the
di↵erent
strips.
perfect cavity wall, shown in Fig. 8a.
defects, an optimized defect distribution can have a more than
Further
in Ea require
30%
higher
critical
current density
than a homogeneously
disThis
work,
presented
in chapter
2 below and published
in Ref.increases
[61], advances
our a conceptual breakthrough
in
our
understanding
of
Nb-cavity
order
superconducting
film.
understanding of the magnetic field penetration into superconducting samples of com- performance limits or new
constituent materials. New material candidates being considThe need for high-current, low-cost superconductors conered include Nb3 Sn, NbTiN, MgB2 , Fe-based superconductinues to grow with new applications in lightweight motors
tors, and engineered multilayer or stratified structures (see
and generators, as well as strong magnets for high-energy acFig. 8b). SRF cavities operate at temperatures well below Tc
celerators, NMR machines, or even Tokamak fusion reactors.
and high enough frequencies to drive the superconductor into
Many of these applications require large magnetic fields and
a metastable state, near breakdown. The resulting period aptherefore large critical currents, which is both a fundamenproaches intrinsic time scales, such as vortex nucleation and
tal research and engineering challenge as it requires reliably
quasi-particle relaxation times.
fabrication of uniform, km-long high-performance superconducting cables having an optimal pinning microstructure.
While the experimental progress in improving the performance and quality factor of SRF cavities has been impresConsequently, there are two main aspects that must be adsive149 , e.g., the counter-intuitive increase of the quality factor
dressed for large-field applications: (i) determining the best
with nitrogen doping, it is mostly based on trail-and-error appossible pinning landscape and geometry for a targeted appliproaches. A deep fundamental understanding is important to
cation and (ii) controlling fabrication of long superconductmake more systematic progress, requiring new theoretical and
ing cables to incorporate an optimized pinning landscape with

11
(a)

(b)

(c)

B
bulk
Nb, Pb
vortex
penetration

pancake
vortex

bulk

Nb, Pb
surface
defects
coated SC insulating
layers

FIG. 8. Surface disorder and multilayers in SRF cavities. (a) Sketch showing how vortices (red) parallel to the surface of a cavity wall
penetrate the wall (outside the superconductor, the red lines illustrate field lines), (b) intercalating insulating layers (SI[SI]S) will cause vortex
pancakes to form and might limit the penetration depth of vortices47,147 . (c) Simulation snapshot of surface vortex penetration into a type-II
superconductor having spherical defects (yellow) near the surface in an AC magnetic field parallel to the surface. Vortex lines are shown in
red. The planar projection shows the superconducting order parameter amplitude.

computational studies. Because the cavities operate out-ofequilibrium, a phenomenological description based on TDGL
theory can only serve as a rough, qualitative guide. Developing a fundamental theory describing the nonlinear and nonequilibrium current response of SRF cavities requires a microscopic description based on quantum transport equations for
non-equilibrium superconductors. A microscopic description,
however, is challenging because the RF currents under strong
drive conditions (i.e., high field frequencies and amplitudes
near the breakdown/superheating field) affect both the superconducting order parameter and the kinetics of quasiparticles,
all of which have to be treated self-consistently. This endeavor
requires development of numerical approaches to solve the
quantum transport equations, based on the Keldysh and Eilenberger formulations of non-equilibrium superconductivity in
the strong-coupling limit. The Keldysh-Eilenberger quantum
transport equations are, in general, non-local in space-time,
non-linear, and in many physical situations involve multiple
length and time scales. Solving these equations requires considerable computational resources, which are now becoming
available with exa-scale computing facilities.
Herein lies a transformative opportunity to dramatically
boost the performance of SRF cavities. Namely, researchers
are now equipped to develop microscopic theoretical models,
and incorporate them into computational codes, to reveal the
origin and mechanisms that limit the accelerating field of SRF
cavities. The acquired knowledge will then guide materials
optimization to maximize the critical currents, superheating
fields, and quench fields. Reaching the theoretical limits for
these parameters necessitates suppressing vortex nucleation.
At high RF magnetic field amplitudes, screening currents near the vacuum-superconductor interface can nucleate
Abrikosov vortices that can quench the cavity, see Fig. 8c.
This vortex breakdown depends on (i) the amplitude and frequency of the surface field, (ii) the cavity's surface roughness,
and (iii) the type, distribution, and size of defects near the
interface. The impact of near-surface defects on vortices is
diametric: they may reduce the potential barrier for vortex

nucleation6 , but also pin nascent vortices generated by nucleation at the surface, preventing a vortex avalanche and substantial dissipation. Given this, there are various possible optimal microstructures for the SRF constituent materials: (i) a
"clean" superconductor with a maximum surface barrier, (ii)
a superconductor with a thin (few ξ ) defect-free surface and
nanoscale defects in its bulk, or (iii) some special spatial gradient in the size and/or density of defects.
Large-scale TDGL simulation can be applied to study the
conditions under which vortex avalanches form, devise mechanisms that are effective at mitigating these avalanches and,
more generally, gain insight into the flux penetration under RF
field conditions. Furthermore, by coupling the TDGL and heat
transport equations, this method can study hot spots, providing insight on avoiding the formation of these hot spots in SRF
cavity walls. As previously mentioned, though TDGL cannot
produce quantitative results, it can serve as a useful guide to
experiments and also provide insight into simulations based
on microscopic transport equations. Lastly, though discussed
in the context of SRF cavities, these new computational methods can be applied to superconducting cables for AC power
applications.

2.

Vortices in Quantum Circuits

a. Energy loss due to vortices. Similar to SRF cavities,
superconducting circuits for quantum information also operate at RF/microwave frequencies and are affected by vortices. Specifically, along with parasitic two-level fluctuators
and quasiparticles, vortices are a considerable source of energy loss in superconducting quantum circuits21,26,152 . These
energy loss mechanisms create a noisy environment in which
the qubit irreversibly interacts stochastically, rather than deterministically. Consequently, the evolution of the quantum state
is unpredictable, increasingly deviating over time from predictions until the qubit state is eventually lost. This is called
decoherence, which limits the amount of time T1 over which

12

(a)
(c)

(d)

(b)

Hole density !" ($%&' )

(e)

(c)

FIG. 9. (a) An optical image showing multiple λ /4 resonators multiplexed to a common feed line and surrounded by a ground plane containing
holes to pin vortices and suppress vortex formation, (b, c) Scanning electron micrographs of superconducting CPW resonator without (b) and
with (c) holes. (d) Quality factor Qi versus B⊥ for varying hole density ρh . The field at which the vortex density matches the hole density
(each hole is filled with one vortex) is plotted with a color-matched vertical line. Above this threshold field, additional vortices are not pinned
by the holes but instead only weakly pinned by film defects and interstitial pinning effects. (e) ∆ fr / fr versus B⊥ for varying ρh . Reprinted
with permission from Ref. [151]. Copyright 2019, American Physical Society.

information is retained in qubits to the microsecond range and
there is typically a large spread in the T1 times for each qubit
in multi-qubit systems153 .
Vortices appear in superconducting quantum circuits due to
stray magnetic fields, self-fields generated by bias currents,
and pulsed control fields. In addition to limiting T1 in qubits,
thermally-activated vortex motion can cause significant noise
in superconducting circuits and reduce the quality factor Q of
superconducting microwave resonators22,31,151 . To mitigate
this, techniques have been developed to either prevent vortex
formation or trap vortices in regions outside of the path of
operating currents. Shielding circuits from ambient magnetic
fields and narrowing linewidths constituting the device154,155
significantly reduce the vortex population. For example, for
a line of width w, flux will not enter until the field surpasses
Φ0 /w2 . Because of this realization, flux qubits typically contain linewidths of 1 μm, therefore exclude vortex formation up
to a threshold magnetic field of roughly 2 mT, which is 20
times larger than the Earth's magnetic field154 .
Though shielding has enabled remarkable headway in improving the stability of superconducting qubits for computing applications, it is not a complete solution. A reasonable
amount of shielding can only suppress the field by a small
amount, which may be insufficient if devices must operate in
high-field environments. Moreover, shielding may render devices useless in quantum sensing applications in which the
purpose of the device is to sense the external environment.
This has sparked research on further modifications to the device design and on understanding the effects of a magnetic
field on different architectures of quantum circuits, including transmon qubits156 and superconducting resonators151,157 ,
which are integral components to readout.

In addition to shielding, another common remedy for the
vortex problem in superconducting circuits involves micropatterning arrays of holes in the ground plane to serve as vortex
traps and reduce the prevalence of vortex formation within
that perforated area22,158–160 , see Fig. 9. For example, Bothner et al. found that Q(B = 4.5 mT) is a factor of 2.5 higher
in Nb resonators containing flux trapping holes in the ground
plane158 compared to without the holes. However, Chiaro et
al.160 showed that, without careful design, these features can
increase the density of and subsequently losses from parasitic
two-level fluctuators, thought to primarily form at surfaces
and interfaces. Moreover, coplanar waveguide resonators
were recently found to be more robust to external magnetic
fields when the superconducting ground plane area is reduced,
which lowers the effective magnetic field inside the cavity, and
by coupling the resonator inductively instead of capacitively
to the microwave feedline, shielding the feedline157 .
The methods we have discussed here engendered tremendous advances in suppressing the vortex problem in superconducting quantum circuits, however, the details are materialdependent. Likewise optimal mitigation strategies may be
material-dependent. For example, Song et al. compared the
microwave response of vortices in superconducting Re (rhenium) and Al coplanar waveguide resonators with a lattice of
flux-trapping holes in the ground plane. Generally, in both
systems, vortices shift the resonance frequency f0 , broaden
the resonance dip |S21 |( f ), and reduce the quality factor Q.
However, vortices in the Al resonators induce greater loss and
are more sensitive to flux creep effects than in the Re resonators. The Al resonator experienced a far more substantial fractional frequency shift d f / f0 with increasing frequency
than the Re resonator. Furthermore, while the loss 1/Q due to

13
vortices increased with frequency for Re, it decreased for Al.
Most research on the microwave response of vortices in quantum circuits is limited to Al22,31,33,34,160 ,
Nb32,158,159,161,162 , NbTiN151,155 , and Re22 . Whereas Al and
Nb are used in commercial quantum computers, superconducting nitrides (TiN, NbN, NiTiN)163–172 and Re have garnered substantial attention because they may suffer less from
parasitic two-level fluctuators, which are particularly problematic in oxides and at interfaces26 . Nitrides and Re are
known to develop thinner oxide layers than Al and Nb, and
can be grown epitixally on common substrates173–175 . To
develop a generic understanding of how to design quantum
circuits that are resilient to ambient magnetic fields and control vortices in circuits made of next-generation materials, we
must study circuits consisting of broader ranges of materials,
perform further studies on nitride-based circuits, investigate
different designs for flux trapping, and conduct imaging studies that can observe rather than infer the efficacy of vortex pinning sites. There have been a few studies that imaged vortices
in superconducting strips, which provided guidance on appropriate line widths to preclude vortex formation32,176 . To build
upon this, imaging studies (using e.g. a scanning SQUID or
magnetic force microscope) of devices would inform on the
efficacies of flux trapping sites, reveal locations in which vortices form, and track vortex motion.
b. Vortices in topological quantum computing schemes.
Up until now, we have discussed vortices exclusively as a
nuisance, which is indeed the case for a broad range of applications. A notable exception lies in the burgeoning field
of topological quantum computing, in which vortices serve as
hosts for Majorana modes177 . Qubits encoded using Majorana
modes are predicted to be relatively robust to noise, thus have
long coherence times. One way to realize this is to couple a
superconductor to a topological insulator, induce vortices in
the superconductor, and Majorana states are predicted to nucleate in the vortex core. (Also note that Majorana modes
have been theorized to exist in other systems)178–184 . Initially
elusive, signatures of Majorana vortex modes have been recently observed in a variety of systems, including the ironbased superconductor FeTex Se1−x 185,186 , EuS islands overlying gold nanowires187 , superconducting Al layer encasing an
InAs nanowire188 , and Bi2 Te3 /NbSe2 heterostructures189 . To
exploit these modes for computing, we must be able to control
their vortex hosts. Consequently, vortex pinning research will
be beneficial to vortex-based topological quantum computing
applications.

D. Vortex matter genome using artificial intelligence:
Critical-current-by-design

Over the years, research in superconductivity and vortex
pinning has produced large amounts of experimental and simulation data on microstructures, synthesis, and critical current
behavior. More recently, artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) approaches have enabled revolutionary
advances in the fields of image and speech recognition as well
as automatic translation, and are now finding an increasing

number of applications in scientific research areas that deal
with massive data sets, like particles physics, structural biology, astronomy, and spectroscopy. Combining these will
enable novel approaches to predict pinning landscapes in superconductors for the future design of materials with tailored
properties by using sophisticated ML algorithms and AI models. This has become a promising approach within the criticalcurrent-by-design paradigm, which refers to designing superconductors with desired properties using sophisticated numerical methods replacing traditional trial-and-error approaches.
These properties include maximizing critical currents, achieving robust critical currents with respected to variations of the
pinning landscape (which is important for large-scale commercial applications), or attaining uniform critical currents
with respect to the magnetic field orientation.
The next step towards advancing the use of AI/ML approaches for critical-current-by-design may be to build upon
the genetic algorithms implemented in Ref. [10] to optimize
pinning landscapes for maximum Jc . This approach utilizes
the idea of targeted selection inspired by biological natural
selection. In contrast with conventional optimization techniques, such as coordinate descent, in which one varies only
a few parameters characterizing the entire sample, targeted
evolution allows variations in each defect individually without any a-priori assumptions about the defects' configuration.
This essentially means that one solves an optimization problem with, theoretically, infinite degrees of freedom. Ref. [10]
demonstrated the feasibility of this approach for clean samples as well as ones with preexisting defects, e.g. as found in
commercial coated conductors. The latter, therefore, provides
a post-synthesis optimization step for existing state-of-the-art
wires and a promising path toward the design of tailored functional materials.
However, the mutations of the defects required for the genetic algorithm [see Fig. 10(a)] were chosen randomly. Those
mutations generate "generations" of pinning landscapes, of
which the best is chosen by targeted selection and then used
as a seed for the next generation. Using a simple machine
learning approach could further enhance the convergence of
this method, by performing only mutations which have higher
probabilities of enhancing the critical current. Besides superconductors, this methodology can be used to improve the intrinsic properties of other materials where defects or the topological structure plays an important role, such as magnets or
nanostructured thermoelectrics.
Going beyond these ML-improved simulations, one can
build quantitative data-driven AI approaches for superconductors that will enable, e.g. predicting the critical current phase
diagram and extracting the defect morphology responsible for
its performance directly from the existing accumulated experimental and simulation data without actual dynamics simulations. Here, we will discuss two potentially transformative
opportunities, summarized in Fig. 10(b). The first application is motivated by the need for reliably producing uniform
superconductors on macroscopic commercial scales. This requires a deep understanding of material synthesis processes
e.g., for self-assembled pinning structures in a superconducting matrix (see Fig. 10(b), 1 ). Materials at the forefront of

14
(a) genetic algorithms

Jc ê

(b) data-driven AI

precursors: ci, pi, Ti

synthesis:

SC matrix with defects

c t io

Jc ê

n

defect
evolution

1

2

simulation &
experiment

simulation &
experiment

training

training

ML,
AI

ML,
AI

prediction

many pinning landscapes:

simulation, STM, 3D tomography etc.

prediction

Jc [MA/cm2]

le
d se
e
t
e
targ

Jc é

0.8

0.4

-30

0

30 60 90
field angle [∘]

120

critical current dependencies

FIG. 10. Critical-current-by-design using: (a) Genetic algorithms to optimize critical currents. Starting with a superconductor having intrinsic
defects, genetic algorithms can be used to optimize the defect structure by mutation of defects and targeted selection of landscapes with larger
critical currents. A mutation of a defect (or several defects at once) can be done by, e.g., translation, resizing, deletion, or splitting as sketched
in the defect sequence on the right. Overall, this procedure creates "generations" of mutated defect configurations and only the best is selected
and chosen to be the seed for the next generation shown in the partial tree on the left (circles/dots represent configurations, where the large
numbered one is the best). Using neural networks and machine learning (ML) to predict the best mutations could further improve the targeted
selection approach10 . (b) ML/Artificial intelligence (AI) to improve and tailor defect landscapes in superconductors. 1 illustrates how AI
models can be used to predict pinning landscapes from synthesis parameters and, vice versa, to predict synthesis parameters like precursor
concentrations, pressures, and temperatures in, e.g., vapor deposition methods, for a targeted pinning landscape. The models need to be
trained by experimental or simulation data sets. 2 similarly shows how to directly predict critical current dependencies, like field orientation
dependencies, from pinning topologies and vice versa. Again, the underlying model is trained by experimental and simulation data.

this quest are REBCO films with self-assembled oxide inclusions in the form of nanorods and nanopartices104,190 . For example, BaZrO3 (BZO) nanorods that nucleate and grow during metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) have
proven particularly effective for pinning vortices191 .
The major difficulties in achieving consistent and uniform
critical currents in REBCO tapes containing BZO nanorods
are the interplay of many parameters controlling the deposition process (temperature of the substrate and of the precursor gases, deposition rate, precursor composition, etc.) and
strong sensitivity of the microstructure to small variations in
these parameters. Even for the same nominal level of Zr additives, significant variations in nanorod diameter, size distribution, spacing distribution, and angular splay have been
observed. Physical factors controlling these variations remain
poorly understood. For example, the nanorods' diameter may
be a mostly equilibrium property resulting from the interplay
of strain and surface energies or caused by kinetic effects controlled by surface diffusion of adatoms and deposition rate.
These complexities have precluded the development of predictive models. However, making use of the accumulated

experimental data sets and possibly synthesis/kinetic growth
simulation data (Monte Carlo or molecular dynamic simulations, which are also still in an exploratory phase), allows
building ML/AI models to predict pinning landscapes for
given synthesis parameters as described above or, more relevant for commercial application, the prediction of synthesis
parameters for a desired, uniform pinning landscape.
To constitute a complete vortex-pinning genome, a second
notable milestone is using AI to predict Jc for a given pinning landscape based solely on data recognition (disregarding
TDGL simulations) and, conversely, predicting the necessary
pinning landscape to produce a desired Jc . In fact, the latter cannot be achieved by direct simulations. Typical data
sets, both experimental and simulation-based, contain information on defect structures, critical currents, and other transport characteristics for a wide range of magnetic fields and
temperatures. Creating an organized database of this information would enable (i) quickly accessible critical current values
for a wide range of conditions, (ii) an effective mapping of
simulation parameters onto experimental measurements, and
(iii) using the data as training sets for AI-driven predictions of

15
defect structures for desired applications.
Experimentally, microstructures are routinely probed by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and, less directly,
by x-ray diffraction (XRD). In contrast to simulation data,
which contains all information about pinning landscapes, the
extracted information is usually rather limited, since TEM
only allows imaging of thin slices of the material and only
detects relatively large defects. A full 3D tomography of defect landscapes [cf. Fig. 4(a)] is very time consuming and
expensive, and therefore currently typically infeasible. The
resulting AI/ML models will also allow for a cross-validation
of the simulation-based data with available experimental data
on materials properties in superconductors with different defect microstructures.
Overall, this AI/ML approach will directly reduce the cost
and development time of commercial superconductors and, in
particular, accelerate their design for targeted applications. To
estimate the benefit of such an approach, one can consider,
for example, a pinning landscape defined by 9 parameters.
Using traditional interpolation in this 9-dimensional parameter space one would need to have a certain number of data
points per parameter. For the modest case of 15 data points
per direction one would need to simulate (measurements are
infeasible) 159 ≈ 4 * 1010 pinning landscapes, which – assuming 15 minutes per simulation on a single GPU – results in
a total simulation time of a million GPU years. This simulation time is beyond current capabilities, even on the largest
supercomputers. However, surrogate ML models can reduce
this to approximately 104 simulations, while maintaining the
same resulting accuracy (see seed studies in, e.g., Ref. [192]).
In this section, we mentioned the complications associated with 3D tomographic imaging of a superconductor's microstructure to supply complete information for simulations.
In the next section, we detail the limitations of tomographic
imaging and other advanced microscopy techniques, many
of which will be revolutionized by improvements in computational power and the application of advanced neural networks. This in turn will have a transformative impact on vortex physics.

E. Advanced microscopy to better understand
vortex-defect interactions
1.

Quantitative point-defect spectroscopy

We have discussed the role of point defects in suppressing
vortex motion via weak collective pinning. Notably, the theory of weak collective pinning51 has attracted significant attention as it can explain the origin of novel vortex phases, e.g.
vortex glass193,194 and vortex liquid195 phases, as well as the
associated vortex melting phase transition 196,197 . It cannot,
however, be used to predict Jc in single crystals, whose defect landscape is dominated by point defects. This limitation
is not necessarily reflective of gaps in weak collective pinning
theory itself, but rather the fact that point defect densities are
typically unknown because they are extremely challenging to
measure over a broad spatial range.

Consequently, point defects are the dark matter of materials. Herein lies yet another transformative opportunity in
vortex physics. Developing a technique to accurately measure point defect profiles and subsequent systematic studies
correlating point defects, Jc (B, T ), and S(B, T ) may lead to
recipes for predictably tuning the properties of superconductors, most directly impacting crystals and epitaxial materials
that lack a significant contributions from strong pinning centers. The most promising routes for quantitative point defect microscopy include scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), atom probe tomography (APT), atom electron tomography (AET), and positron annihilation lifetime
spectroscopy (PALS). Here, we primarily focus on STEM
combined with AET, then will introduce APT and PALS as
other techniques with atomic-scale resolution that are relatively untapped opportunities to reveal structure-property relationships in superconductors.
In scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), an
imaging electron beam is transmitted through a thin specimen, such that detectors can construct a real-space image of
the microstructure and collect other diffraction data. In superconductors, STEM studies have revealed a panoply of defects, including columnar tracks, defect clusters, dislocations,
twin boundaries, grain boundaries, and stacking faults. These
studies can also provide information on other pertinent microstructural properties, including strained regions that induce
variations in the superconducting order parameter, therefore,
preferential regions for vortices to sit in an otherwise defectfree landscape. To identify dopants (e.g. BaHfO3 nanoparticles), STEM is also often performed in conjunction with
analytical techniques, such as energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy.
To understand the ability of STEM to determine point defect densities in superconductors, we must first understand
what limits the spatial resolution and throughput. Older
STEMs cannot resolve point defects due to imperfections
(aberrations) in the objective lenses and other factors that
set the resolution higher than the wavelength of the imaging beam. Atomic resolution was finally achieved upon
the advent of transformational aberration correction schemes,
which were first successfully demonstrated in the late 1990s
and have been increasingly widely adopted over the past
decade198–201 . In fact, the spatial resolution of an aberrationcorrected STEM has now fallen below the Bohr radius of
0.53 pm202–205 .
Though point defects can now be imaged in superconductors, it is not straightforward to determine point defect densities. A single scan captures a small fraction of the sample, which may not be representative of defect distributions
throughout the entire specimen. Accordingly, low throughput prevents collecting a sufficiently large dataset to provide a
reasonably quantitative picture of defect concentrations. One
of the limiting factors for throughput is the detector speed,
which has recently improved significantly owing to the development of direct electron detectors such as active pixel
sensors (APS) and hybrid pixel array detectors (PAD). These
detectors have higher quantum efficiency, operate at faster
readout speeds, and have a broader dynamic range than con-

16
ventional detectors-charge-coupled devices (CCDs) coupled
with scintillators201 .
Enabled by fast detectors, the advent of 4D-STEM206 is
another recent, major milestone that is a significant step towards determining point defect densities. Note that 4D-STEM
involves collecting a 2D raster scan in which 2D diffraction data is collected at each scanned pixel, generating a
4D dataset containing vast microstructural information. In
addition to high-speed direct electron detectors, computational power was prerequisite for 4D-STEM implementation,
in which massive datasets can be produced: see Ref. [206]
for an example in which a single 4D-STEM image recorded
in 164 s consumes 420 GB. Hence, over the past few years,
this has warranted efforts to develop fast image simulation
algorithms201 and schemes to apply deep neural networks to
extract information, such as defect species and location207 .
Furthermore, STEMs can be used for electron tomography,
in which images that are collected as the sample is incrementally rotated are combined to create a 3D image of the
microstructure.208
Aberration correction, high-speed detectors, and the data
revolution are transformative advances that will certainly accelerate progress in understanding structure-property relationships in superconductors. Nevertheless, there are more salient
impediments to an atomic-scale understanding of the true
sample under study, including artifacts from sample preparation techniques209 and beam scattering within thick samples.
To remedy the latter, materials are often deposited onto membranes, though this may not present a representative picture
of the defect landscape when the sample is in a different form
(e.g. thicker and on a different substrate).
Atom probe tomography (APT) is another microscopy technique with atomic-scale resolution, and it also provides 3D
compositional imaging of surface and buried features. Over
the past decade, it has become increasingly popular due to
the development of a commercial local-electrode atom probe
(LEAP). For APT, the specimen must be shaped as a needle and an applied electric field successively ejects layers of
atoms from the surface of the specimen towards a detector.
By means of time-of-flight mass spectroscopy, the detector
progressively collects information on the position and species
of each atom, reconstructing a 3D tomographic image of the
specimen that can span 0.2 μm × 0.2 μm × 0.5 μm with resolution of 0.1 − 0.5 nm210 . As each atom is individually identifiable, it can provide remarkably revealing information on
the microstructure. Similar to STEM, sample preparation and
data processing are bottlenecks; APT also currently suffers
from limited detection efficiency211 . Furthermore, the analyzed volume (field of view) is currently too small to be sufficiently representative of the sample to provide accurate quantitative details on point defect concentrations. The biggest
complication, however, may be that the defect landscape of
the APT specimen, shaped as a needle, may dramatically differ from the material in the form in which we typically study
its electromagnetic properties.
Lastly, positron annihilation spectroscopy is a hitherto untapped opportunity to correlate vacancy concentrations with
electrical transport properties in superconductors. This non-

destructive technique can determine information about vacancies and larger voids in a material by bombarding it
with positrons at 50 eV to 30 keV acceleration energies,212,213
then measuring the time lapse between the implantation of
positrons and emission of annihilation radiation. Upon implantation, positrons thermalize in ∼10 ps then either interact
with an electron and annihilate or form a positronium atom
(electron-positron pair)214 . Positronium atoms will then ricochet off the walls of voids and eventually annihilate, releasing
a γ-ray that can be detected with integrated γ-ray detectors.
The lifetime of the positron can provide information on void
sizes and concentration of vacancies: longer lifetimes correspond to larger voids and higher vacancy densities.
PALS has been used for decades to sensitively detect vacancies and vacancy clusters in metals and semiconductors212,215
as well as probe subnanometer, intermolecular voids in
polymers212,216 . Depth profiling is possible on the nm to the
μm scale212,217–219 by tuning the positron implantation energy and, though some systems have beam scanning capabilities enabling lateral resolution, spatial resolution is generally
quite poor due to large beam spot sizes and positron diffusion.
In most systems, the spot size is typically ∼ 1 mm. However, PALS instruments containing microprobes are capable
of spot sizes that are smaller than 100 μm220,221 . For example, in 2017, Gigl et al.221 developed a state-of-the-art system
with a minimum lateral resolution of 33 μm and maximum
scanning range of 19 × 19 mm2 . Regarding speed, the system
can scan an area of 1 × 1 mm2 with a resolution of 250 μm in
less than 2 minutes, which is considered to be an exceptionally short time frame221 . Moreover, David et al.220 reported
a remarkably small spot diameter of 2 μm in a setup with a
short scanning range of 0.2 × 0.6 mm2 . Unfortunately, further improvements to beam focus may be ineffectual and spatial resolution comparable to electron microscopy is unreachable. The spatial resolution is ultimately limited by lateral
straggle: the positron diffusion length is roughly several hundreds of nanometers in a perfect crystal, which limits the spot
size even if the beam focus is improved217 . Ongoing efforts
to advance PALS include improving theoretical methods for
interpretation of experimental results, advancing theoretical
descriptions of positron physics (states, thermalization, and
trapping), incorporating sample stages that allow tuning sample environmental conditions (e.g. temperature, biasing), and
improving the efficiency of beam moderators (which convert
polychromatic positron beams to monochromatic beams)217 .

2. Cryogenic microstructural analysis for accurate
determination of structure-property relationships

Accurately correlating the formation of different vortex
structures and intricacies of vortex-defect interactions with
electromagnetic response is not trivial. Typically, conventional microscopy is performed under conditions that differ from a material's actual working environment: structural characterization of superconductors is routinely conducted at room temperature whereas accessing the superconducting regime requires cryogenic temperatures and is probed

17
using electromagnetic stimuli. Yet we know that temperature changes significantly impact the microstructure, causing
strain-induced phase separation and altering defects such as
dislocations. Electromagnetic stimuli may similarly impact
the defect landscape. Hence, another transformative opportunity in vortex physics is cryogenic structural characterization of superconductors under the influence of electromagnetic stimuli, which requires advances in microscopy.

Scanning transmission electron microscopy combined with
spectroscopic analysis is one of the most informative methods
of gathering structural and chemical analysis at the atomicscale. Accurate determination of structure-property relationships require in-situ property measurements conducted concommitently with microscopy. Recent, rapid advances in insitu transmission electron microscopy have been fueled by
the introduction of a variety of commercial in-situ sample
holders that allow for electrical biasing, heating, magnetic
response, and mechanical deformation of nanomaterials222 .
These new capabilities have accelerated progress in a variety
of fields, including battery electrochemistry, liquid-phase materials growth, bias-induced solid-state transformations in e.g.
resistive switching devices for memory and neuromorphic applications, gas-phase reactions and catalysis, solid-state chemical transformations e.g at interfaces between semiconductors
and metallic contacts, and mechanical behavior222 . For insitu TEM to be beneficial to superconductors, samples must
be cooled to cryogenic temperatures and studied under the influence of magnetic fields.

Developed in the 1960s, liquid helium cooled stages
have been used to study superconductors, solidified gases,
and magnetic domains223 , initially without the benefit of
aberration-corrected systems with atomic-scale resolution.
More recently, cryogenic STEM with atomic scale resolution has been used to study quantum materials, including lowtemperature spin states. However, these studies have been limited to a single temperature that was above the boiling point
of the choice cryogen (liquid helium or liquid nitrogen)223 ,
due to thermal load, whereas variable temperature capabilities
are requisite for probing phase transitions and the effects of
thermal energy. To this end, there has recently been a push
to develop advanced sample holders with stable temperature
control223,224 . One of the most promising efforts is led by
Hummingbird Precision Machine, a company that is developing a double-tilt, cryo-electrical biasing holder for TEMs
that allows samples to be concurrently cooled to liquid helium temperatures and electrically biased, while undergoing
atomic-scale structural imaging224 . Because of such industry involvement in the development and commercialization of
cryogenic sample holders and, more generally, the rapid pace
of in-situ TEM (e.g. the number of in-situ TEM papers doubled between 2010 and 2012225 ) we expect to see large advancements in this identified challenge over the next several
years.

3.

Cross-sectional imaging of vortex structures

In Sec. I, we discussed how competition between pinning
forces, vortex elasticity, and current-induced forces results
in complicated vortex structures, such as double-kinks, halfloops, and staircases. Typically, we may conjecture which
structures have formed based on the microstructure and applied field orientation. Subsequent correlations are made between the presumed structures and the magnetization or transport results, which may be suggestive of a specific vortex
phase. However, without direct proof of the structures, we
cannot unequivocally correlate distinct excitations with specific vortex phases. For example, in a study of a NbSe2 crystal
containing columnar defects tilted 30◦ from the c-axis, magnetization results evinced glassy behavior when the field was
aligned with the c-axis40 . As these conditions are likely to
produce vortex staircases, the question arose whether (and
why) vortex staircases would create a vortex glass phase.
Direct imaging of vortex-defect interactions, in a way that
captures the vortex structure overlaid on the atomic-scale
structure, would enable unambiguous determination of the
phases produced by specific vortex excitations. Accordingly,
development of advanced microscopy techniques that can produce cross sectional images is another transformative opportunity in vortex physics. In this section, we summarize common techniques for imaging superconducting vortices, detail
their limitations, and describe the features of an advanced instrument that could accelerate progress in understanding and
designing materials with predetermined vortex phases.
Lorentz TEM (LTEM), which exploits the Aharonov-Bohm
effect to capture magnetic contrast, was first used by Tonomura to image superconducting vortices227 and has played a
major role in identifying new materials that host exotic magnetic phases. However, in LTEM, the objective lens serves the
dual purpose of applying a field and observing the response
of the specimen, and is therefore limited to plan-view imaging. That is, for out-of-plane magnetic fields applied to a thin
film, the technique can only image magnetic contrast across
the film's surface-such that the vortex structure itself and interactions with defects within the bulk are out-of-view.
Building upon Tonomura's initial work, Hitachi228,229 developed a unique, specialized system containing a multipole
magnet that can apply fields up to 50 mT at various orientations with respect to the sample. Though this system still
produces plan-view images, rather than cross-sectional images (revealing the full vortex structure), variations in the contrast of the imaged vortex section has provided remarkable
evidence of vortex pinning and useful information on vortexdefect interactions.226,230–232 For example, Fig. 11(a) shows
a LTEM image in which a vortex trapped within a columnar
defect can be identified by its shape and contrast, compared to
untrapped vortices.
The most promising technique for directly imaging vortexdefect interactions may be differential phase contrast microscopy (DPC)233 . Conducted in a TEM, DPC is one
of the best tools for quantitatively imaging nanoscale magnetic structures. In a TEM, an illuminating electron beam
is deflected by electromagnetic fields within a material.

18
Vol. 71, No. 8, August, 2002

LETTERS

O. KAMIMURA et al.

1841

(a)

of the experimental setup. e: electron beam; S: specimen;
columnar defect; TA: tilt axis; C: coils generating a
(B) in the same direction as the columnar defects. The
ne (OP) is also shown, where contrast is generated at the
by the Fresnel phase-contrast method. Projected direction
d (PB) and projected tilt axis (PTA) onto OP are indicated

(b)

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

In this Perspective, we have highlighted the pivotal role that
vortices play in superconductors and how improving our ability to control vortex dynamics will have an immediate impact
on a range of applications. Herein we discussed major open
questions in vortex physics, which include the following:

Fig. 2. Typical Lorentz micrograph taken at an appropriate defocus of
540 mm (30 K, 0.5 mT). In the lower inset, the image rotation effect at
pinned (a) and unpinned (a') vortices is emphasized by discretization of
the intensity levels.

vortex

IV.

(c)

duced at 20! with respect to the specimen
diation of 240 MeV Au15þ ions by using the
lerator at the Japan Atomic Energy Research
RI).
mental setup is shown in Fig. 1. A collimated
(e) illuminated the specimen (S) tilted at 30! .
was mounted such that the columnar defects
parallel as possible to the tilt axis (TA), in
ct the difference between vortex lines (V)
he columnar defects and unpinned ones. The
(B), generated by the coils (C), was oriented
columnar defects. The interaction between the
and the magnetic field of the vortices resulted
t of the wave, which was transformed into an
bution in the observation plane (OP) by image

FIG. 11. Lorentz Transmission Electron Microscopy (LTEM) im-

2 with columnar defects, two types of vortex
een observed in Lorentzage
micrographs
taken at
of vortices
in Bi2 Sr2 CaCu2 O8+δ , irradiated to induce columefocusing, which appeared as bright-dark
nar
defects.
Trapped
vortices can be distinguished from free ones,
with high contrast and the other with low
slightly elongated in the
direction
of the shape and contrast (lower contrast for vortices trapped
based
on their
axis (PTA). A typical Lorentz micrograph at
invortices
columnar
mT is shown in Fig. 2. The
having lowdefects). Plan-view LTEM images have provided usendicated by arrowheads.ful
We information
have confirmed on vortex dynamics, though the 3D vortex structure
ast images correspond to vortices pinned at the
within
the bulk is hidden from view. Reprinted with permission from
cts, whereas high-contrast
images correspond
ortices, whose direction isRef.
perpendicular
the
[226].to Copyright
2002, The Physical Society of Japan. TEM im12)
faces.
Detailed features of pinned and
agesinsets,
of (b)
a heavy-ion-irradiated NbSe2 crystal40 and (c) a BaZrO3 ices are shown in the lower
revealing
selected pinned (a) and unpinned
doped(a')
(Yvortices
Gd0.23 )Ba2 Cu3 Oy film grown by Miura et al.38 . Per0.77
discrete intensity levels, so that not only
the
use TEM image in (c) granted by M. Miura. Red line is a
and elongation but alsomission
some image to
rotation
es of vortices can be distinguished. The image
cartoon of how a vortex might wind through the disorder landscape.
ibed here means that the lines dividing the
k regions of the vortex images
are rotated.
Advanced
microscopy techniques designed to capture this structure
ticed phenomenologically that the defocus of
is a transformative opportunity in vortex physics.
e plays a crucial role in the image contrast and Fig. 3. Through-focus series of Lorentz micrographs at 30 K and 0.5 mT.
he vortices. Figure 3 shows a wide-range
Defocus distances were (a) 2900 mm, (b) 540 mm and (c) 230 mm. PTA
and PB are also indicated by arrows.
series taken at decreasing values of defocus in

DPC microscopy leverages these deflections to directly image electric and magnetic fields within materials at atomic
resolution234,235 . Consequently, scanning the beam (STEM)
produces spatial maps of nanoscale magnetic field contrast
to complement the atomic-scale structural information resolved by a transmitting beam. Accordingly, STEM-DPC is
an invaluable tool in nanomagnetism research, used to image magnetic domains236,237 and canted structures such as
skyrmions238–240 . Most notably, it is one of few techniques
that can unequivocally identify new magnetic phases and exotic magnetic quasiparticles in real-space. More generally, it
can also image nanoscale electric fields241–245 in materials and
devices. To image vortex-defect structures in an STEM capable of DPC, the sample stage would need to be cryogenically
cooled and the chamber should contain a magnet. Complications will include designing the system in a way in which the
magnetic field does not significantly distort the beam.

• How do thermal and quantum vortex creep depend on material parameters and how can we efficiently consider creep in
predictive simulations?
• What is the highest attainable critical current Jc ?
• How do we optimize vortex pinning in quantum circuits and
controllably exploit vortices in certain schemes for topological computing?
• Given the multitude of variables that govern Jc , what computational methods can improve the efficacy of the criticalcurrent-by-design approach?
• What is the relationship between Jc and point defect densities as well as vortex structures and vortex phases?
To answer these and other identified questions, we delineated five major categories of near-term transformative opportunities: The first involves applying recent advances in analytical and computational methods to model vortex creep,
and performing more extensive experimental investigations
into quantum creep. Second, we discussed how critical currents higher than the current record of 30% Jd may be obtained by implementing a combination of core pinning and
magnetic pinning. This is a promising route for dramatic
advancements in large-scale applications-achieving higher
currents densities enables smaller motors and generators as
well as higher field magnets. Third, we noted that vortices
do not only hamper large-scale applications, but also induce
losses in nanoscale quantum circuits. Though shielding circuits has proven effective in minimizing vortex formation,
quantum senors may require exposure to the environment, necessitating a better understanding of vortex dynamics in circuits. Furthermore, vortices are desirable for use in quantum
information applications, in which case we must study how
to manipulate single flux lines to implement braiding and entanglement of Majorana Bound States. Fourth, the recent advent of high-performance computational tools to study vortex matter numerically has pushed us to the verge of predicting a superconductor's electrical transport properties based
on the material and microstructure. However, the quest to
automatically tailor a defect landscape for specific applications requires considering a fairly high-dimensional parameter
space. To enable an effective mapping between simulations
and experiments and manage the multitude of variables, we
propose to apply self-adjusting machine learning algorithms
that use neural networks. Fifth and finally, to accurately determine structure-property relationships, we need to experimentally measure and routinely consider point defect densities, which are challenging to determine. We therefore highlighted the prevailing microscopy techniques for point defect
measurements, which include 4D-STEM and positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy.

19
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

S.E. acknowledges support from the National Science
Foundation DMR-1905909. A.G. was supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. R.W. acknowledges funding support from the Heidelberger Akademie
der Wissenschaften through its WIN initiative (8. Teilprogramm).

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
1 T.

Tamegai, T. Taen, H. Yagyuda, Y. Tsuchiya, S. Mohan, T. Taniguchi,
Y. Nakajima, S. Okayasu, M. Sasase, H. Kitamura, T. Murakami, T. Kambara, and Y. Kanai, "Effects of particle irradiations on vortex states in
iron-based superconductors," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 25, 084008 (2012).
2 I. A. Sadovskyy, A. E. Koshelev, C. L. Phillips, D. A. Karpeev, and
A. Glatz, "Stable large-scale solver for Ginzburg-Landau equations for superconductors," J. Comput. Phys. 294, 639 (2015).
3 I. A. Sadovskyy, A. E. Koshelev, A. Glatz, V. Ortalan, M. W. Rupich, and
M. Leroux, "Simulation of the Vortex Dynamics in a Real Pinning Landscape of YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ Coated Conductors," Phys. Rev. Appl. 5, 014011
(2016).
4 A. Glatz, V. K. Vlasko-Vlasov, W.-K. Kwok, and G. W. Crabtree, "Vortex
cutting in superconductors," Phys. Rev. B 94, 064505 (2016).
5 I. A. Sadovskyy, Y. L. Wang, Z.-L. Xiao, W.-K. Kwok, and A. Glatz,
"Effect of hexagonal patterned arrays and defect geometry on the critical
current of superconducting films," Phys. Rev. B 95, 075303 (2017).
6 G. J. Kimmel, A. Glatz, V. M. Vinokur, and I. A. Sadovskyy, "Edge effect
pinning in mesoscopic superconducting strips with non-uniform distribution of defects," Sci. Rep. 9, 211 (2019).
7 A. E. Koshelev, I. A. Sadovskyy, C. L. Phillips, and A. Glatz, "Optimization of vortex pinning by nanoparticles using simulations of the timedependent Ginzburg-Landau model," Phys. Rev. B 93, 060508 (2016).
8 I. A. Sadovskyy, Y. Jia, M. Leroux, J. Kwon, H. Hu, L. Fang, C. Chaparro,
S. Zhu, U. Welp, J.-M. Zuo, Y. Zhang, R. Nakasaki, V. Selvamanickam,
G. W. Crabtree, A. E. Koshelev, A. Glatz, and W.-K. Kwok, "Toward Superconducting Critical Current by Design," Adv. Mater. 28, 4593 (2016).
9 G. Kimmel, I. A. Sadovskyy, and A. Glatz, "In silico optimization of
critical currents in superconductors," Phys. Rev. E 96, 013318 (2017).
10 I. A. Sadovskyy, A. E. Koshelev, W.-K. Kwok, U. Welp, and A. Glatz,
"Targeted evolution of pinning landscapes for large superconducting critical currents," PNAS 116, 10291 (2019).
11 R. Willa, V. B. Geshkenbein, R. Prozorov, and G. Blatter, "Campbell response in type-II superconductors under strong pinning conditions," Phys.
Rev. Lett. 115, 207001 (2015).
12 R. Willa, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Campbell penetration in the
critical state of type-II superconductors," Phys. Rev. B 92, 134501 (2015).
13 R. Willa, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Probing the pinning landscape in type-II superconductors via Campbell penetration depth," Phys.
Rev. B 93, 064515 (2016).
14 R. Willa, M. Marziali Bermúdez, and G. Pasquini, "Thermal hysteresis
of the Campbell response as a probe for bulk pinning landscape spectroscopy," Phys. Rev. B 98, 184520 (2018).
15 W.-K. Kwok, U. Welp, A. Glatz, A. E. Koshelev, K. J. Kihlstrom, and
G. W. Crabtree, "Vortices in high-performance high-temperature superconductors," Rep. Prog. Phys, 79, 116501 (2016).
16 G. P. Papari, A. Glatz, F. Carillo, D. Stornaiuolo, D. Massarotti, V. Rouco,
L. Longobardi, F. Beltram, V. M. Vinokur, and F. Tafuri, "Geometrical
vortex lattice pinning and melting in YBaCuO submicron bridges," Sci.
Rep. 6, 38677 (2016).

17 R.

Willa, A. E. Koshelev, I. A. Sadovskyy, and A. Glatz, "Peak effect
due to competing vortex ground states in superconductors with large inclusions," Phys. Rev. B 98, 054517 (2018).
18 A. Glatz, I. A. Sadovskyy, U. Welp, W.-K. Kwok, and G. W. Crabtree,
"The quest for high critical current in applied high-temperature superconductors," J. Supercond. Nov. Mag. 33, 127–141 (2020).
19 R. Willa, A. E. Koshelev, I. A. Sadovskyy, and A. Glatz, "Strong-pinning
regimes by spherical inclusions in anisotropic type-II superconductors,"
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 31, 014001 (2018).
20 S. Eley, M. Miura, B. Maiorov, and L. Civale, "Universal lower limit on
vortex creep in superconductors," Nat. Mater. 16, 409–413 (2017).
21 W. D. Oliver and P. B. Welander, "Materials in superconducting quantum
bits," MRS Bulletin 38, 816–825 (2013).
22 C. Song, T. W. Heitmann, M. P. Defeo, K. Yu, R. McDermott, M. Neeley,
J. M. Martinis, and B. L. Plourde, "Microwave response of vortices in
superconducting thin films of Re and Al," Phys. Rev. B 79, 174512 (2009).
23 A. Wallraff, D. I. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, J. Majer, S. Kumar, S. M.
Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, "Strong coupling of a single photon to a superconducting qubit using circuit quantum electrodynamics," Nature 431,
162–167 (2004).
24 A. Blais, R.-S. Huang, A. Wallraff, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf,
"Cavity quantum electrodynamics for superconducting electrical circuits:
An architecture for quantum computation," Phys. Rev. A 69, 062320
(2004).
25 P. Krantz, M. Kjaergaard, F. Yan, T. P. Orlando, S. Gustavsson, and W. D.
Oliver, "A quantum engineer's guide to superconducting qubits," Appl.
Phys. Rev. 6, 021318 (2019).
26 C. Müller, J. H. Cole, and J. Lisenfeld, "Towards understanding two-levelsystems in amorphous solids: insights from quantum circuits," Rep. Prog.
Phys, 82, 124501 (2019).
27 E. Trabaldo, R. Arpaia, M. Arzeo, E. Andersson, D. Golubev, F. Lombardi,
and T. Bauch, "Transport and noise properties of YBCO nanowire based
nanoSQUIDs," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 32, 073001 (2019).
28 D. J. Van Harlingen, B. L. T. Plourde, T. L. Robertson, P. A. Reichardt,
and J. Clarke, "Decoherence in flux qubits due to 1/f noise in josephson
junctions," in Quantum Computing and Quantum Bits in Mesoscopic Systems, edited by A. J. Leggett, B. Ruggiero, and P. Silvestrini (Springer
US, Boston, MA, 2004) pp. 171–184.
29 L. N. Bulaevskii, M. J. Graf, C. D. Batista, and V. G. Kogan, "Vortexinduced dissipation in narrow current-biased thin-film superconducting
strips," Phys. Rev. B 83, 144526 (2011).
30 T. Yamashita, "Physics and device performance of superconducting
nanowire single-photon detectors," Journal of the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology 60, 57–61 (2013).
31 C. Song, M. P. Defeo, K. Yu, and B. L. T. Plourde, "Reducing microwave
loss in superconducting resonators due to trapped vortices," Appl. Phys.
Lett. 95, 232501 (2009).
32 G. Stan, S. B. Field, and J. M. Martinis, "Critical Field for Complete
Vortex Expulsion from Narrow Superconducting Strips," Phys. Rev. Lett.
92, 097003 (2004).
33 I. Nsanzineza and B. L. T. Plourde, "Trapping a single vortex and reducing quasiparticles in a superconducting resonator," Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
117002 (2014).
34 C. Wang, Y. Y. Gao, I. M. Pop, U. Vool, C. Axline, T. Brecht, R. W.
Heeres, L. Frunzio, M. H. Devoret, G. Catelani, L. I. Glazman, and R. J.
Schoelkopf, "Measurement and control of quasiparticle dynamics in a superconducting qubit," Nature Commun. 5, 5836 (2014).
35 N. Miura, H. Nakagawa, T. Sekitani, M. Naito, H. Sato, and Y. Enomoto,
"High-magnetic-field study of high-Tc cuprates," Physica B 319, 310–320
(2002).
36 S. C. Wimbush, "Fundamentals: Flux pinning," in Applied Superconductivity (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2015) Chap. 1, pp. 1–104.
37 M. Leroux, K. J. Kihlstrom, S. Holleis, M. W. Rupich, S. Sathyamurthy,
S. Fleshler, H. P. Sheng, D. J. Miller, S. Eley, L. Civale, A. Kayani, P. M.
Niraula, U. Welp, and W.-K. Kwok, "Rapid doubling of the critical current of yba2 cu3 o7−δ coated conductors for viable high-speed industrial
processing," Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 192601 (2015).
38 M. Miura, B. Maiorov, J. O. Willis, T. Kato, M. Sato, T. Izumi, Y. Shiohara,
and L. Civale, "The effects of density and size of BaMO3 (M=Zr, Nb, Sn)
nanoparticles on the vortex glassy and liquid phase in (Y,Gd)Ba2 Cu3 Oy

20
coated conductors," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26, 035008 (2013).
Eley, M. Leroux, M. W. Rupich, D. J. Miller, H. Sheng, P. M. Niraula,
A. Kayani, U. Welp, W.-K. Kwok, and L. Civale, "Decoupling and tuning
competing effects of different types of defects on flux creep in irradiated
yba2 cu3 o7−δ coated conductors," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 015010
(2017).
40 S. Eley, K. Khilstrom, R. Fotovat, Z. Xiao, A. Chen, D. Chen, M. Leroux,
U. Welp, W. Kwok, and L. Civale, "Glassy Dynamics in a heavy ion
irradiated NbSe2 crystal," (2018).
41 C. P. Bean and J. D. Livingston, "Surface Barrier in Type-II Superconductors," Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 14 (1964).
42 E. Zeldov, A. I. Larkin, V. B. Geshkenbein, M. Konczykowski, D. Majer,
B. Khaykovich, V. M. Vinokur, and H. Shtrikman, "Geometrical Barriers
in High-Temperature Superconductors," Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1428 (1994).
43 E. Zeldov, A. I. Larkin, M. Konczykowski, B. Khaykovich, D. Majer, V. B.
Geshkenbein, and V. M. Vinokur, "Geometrical barriers in type-II superconductors," Physica C 235-240, 2761 (1994).
44 E. H. Brandt, "Geometric barrier and current string in type-II superconductors obtained from continuum electrodynamics," Phys. Rev. B 59, 3369–
3372 (1999).
45 R. Willa, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Suppression of geometric
barrier in type-II superconducting strips," Phys. Rev. B 89, 104514 (2014).
46 A. Gurevich, "Challenges and Opportunities for Applications of Unconventional Superconductors," Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 5, 35
(2014).
47 A. Gurevich, "Theory of RF superconductivity for resonant cavities," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 034004 (2017).
48 A. Gurevich, "Tuning vortex fluctuations and the resistive transition in
superconducting films with a thin overlayer," Phys. Rev. B 98, 024506
(2018).
49 T. Kubo and A. Gurevich, "Field-dependent nonlinear surface resistance
and its optimization by surface nanostructuring in superconductors," Phys.
Rev. B 100, 064522 (2019).
50 P. Dhakal, G. Ciovati, and A. Gurevich, "Flux expulsion in niobium superconducting radio-frequency cavities of different purity and essential contributions to the flux sensitivity," Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams. 23, 023102
(2020).
51 A. I. Larkin and Y. N. Ovchinnikov, "Pinning in type-II superconductors,"
J. Low Temp. Phys. 34, 409 (1979).
52 G. Blatter, M. V. Feigel'man, V. B. Geshkenbein, A. I. Larkin, and V. M.
Vinokur, "Vortices in high-temperature superconductors," Rev. Mod. Phys.
66, 1125 (1994).
53 G. Blatter, V. B. Geshkenbein, and J. A. G. Koopmann, "Weak to strong
pinning crossover," Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 067009 (2004).
54 J. A. G. Koopmann, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Peak effect at the
weak to strong pinning crossover," Physica C 404, 209 (2004).
55 A. U. Thomann, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Dynamical aspects
of strong pinning of magnetic vortices in type-II superconductors," Phys.
Rev. Lett. 108, 217001 (2012).
56 A. U. Thomann, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Vortex dynamics
in type-II superconductors under strong pinning conditions," Phys. Rev. B
96, 144516 (2017).
57 M. Buchacek, R. Willa, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Persistence of pinning and creep beyond critical drive within the strong pinning
paradigm," Phys. Rev. B 98, 094510 (2018).
58 M. Buchacek, R. Willa, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Strong pinning theory of thermal vortex creep in type-II superconductors," Phys. Rev.
B 100, 014501 (2019).
59 M. Buchacek, Z. L. Xiao, S. Dutta, E. Y. Andrei, P. Raychaudhuri, V. B.
Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "Experimental test of strong pinning and
creep in current-voltage characteristics of type-II superconductors," Phys.
Rev. B 100, 224502 (2019).
60 M. Buchacek, V. B. Geshkenbein, and G. Blatter, "The role of rare events
in the pinning problem," arXiv:2008.08010 [cond-mat.supr-con] (2020).
61 R. Averback and T. D. de la Rubia, "Displacement Damage in Irradiated
Metals and Semiconductors," Solid State Phys. 51, 281–402 (1997).
62 L. Fang, Y. Jia, J. A. Schlueter, A. Kayani, Z. L. Xiao, H. Claus,
U. Welp, A. E. Koshelev, G. W. Crabtree, and W.-K. Kwok, "Dopingand irradiation-controlled pinning of vortices in BaFe2 (As1−x Px )2 single
crystals," Phys. Rev. B 84, 140504 (2011).
39 S.

63 A.

A. Gapud, N. T. Greenwood, J. A. Alexander, A. Khan, K. J. Leonard,
T. Aytug, F. A. List, M. W. Rupich, and Y. Zhang, "Irradiation response
of commercial, high-Tc superconducting tapes: Electromagnetic transport
properties," J. Nucl. Mater. 462, 108–113 (2015).
64 H. Goeckner, R. Olson, W. Kwok, H. Claus, and J. Kouvel, "Effects of
Pb-ion irradiation on the vortex pinning in melt-textured YBa2 Cu3 Ox ,"
Physica C Supercond 390, 291–295 (2003).
65 N. Haberkorn, J. Kim, K. Gofryk, F. Ronning, A. S. Sefat, L. Fang,
U. Welp, W. K. Kwok, and L. Civale, "Enhancement of the critical current density by increasing the collective pinning energy in heavy ion irradiated Co-doped BaFe2 As2 single crystals," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28,
055011 (2015).
66 N. Haberkorn, J. Kim, S. Suárez, J.-H. Lee, and S. H. Moon, "Influence
of random point defects introduced by proton irradiation on the flux creep
rates and magnetic field dependence of the critical current density Jc of coevaporated GdBa2 Cu3 O7−δ coated conductors," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28, 125007 (2015).
67 N. Haberkorn, B. Maiorov, I. O. Usov, M. Weigand, W. Hirata,
S. Miyasaka, S. Tajima, N. Chikumoto, K. Tanabe, and L. Civale, "Influence of random point defects introduced by proton irradiation on critical current density and vortex dynamics of Ba(Fe0.925 Co0.075 )2 As2 single
crystals," Phys. Rev. B 85, 014522 (2012).
68 A. Iwase, N. Masaki, T. Iwata, S. Sasaki, and T. Nihira, "Effect of
120 MeV O-16 ion irradiation at low temperatures on superconducting
properties of YBa2 Cu3 O(7−x) and La(1.8) Sr(0.2) CuO4 ," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.
27, L2071–L2074 (1988).
69 Y. Jia, M. LeRoux, D. J. Miller, J. G. Wen, W. K. Kwok, U. Welp, M. W.
Rupich, X. Li, S. Sathyamurthy, S. Fleshler, A. P. Malozemoff, A. Kayani,
O. Ayala-Valenzuela, and L. Civale, "Doubling the critical current density
of high temperature superconducting coated conductors through proton irradiation," Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 122601 (2013).
70 K. J. Kihlstrom, L. Fang, Y. Jia, B. Shen, A. E. Koshelev, U. Welp, G. W.
Crabtree, W.-K. Kwok, A. Kayani, S. F. Zhu, and H.-H. Wen, "High-field
critical current enhancement by irradiation induced correlated and random
defects in (Ba0.6 K0.4 )Fe2 As2 ," Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 202601 (2013).
71 M. Kirk and Y. Yan, "Structure and properties of irradiation defects in
YBa2 Cu3 O7−x ," Micron 30, 507–526 (1999).
72 M. Konczykowski, F. Rullier-Albenque, E. R. Yacoby, A. Shaulov,
Y. Yeshurun, and P. Lejay, "Effect of 5.3-GeV Pb-ion irradiation on irreversible magnetization in Y-Ba-Cu-O crystals," Phys. Rev. B 44, 7167–
7170 (1991).
73 H. Matsui, H. Ogiso, H. Yamasaki, T. Kumagai, M. Sohma, I. Yamaguchi, and T. Manabe, "4-fold enhancement in the critical current density
of YBa2 Cu3 O7 films by practical ion irradiation," Appl. Phys. Lett. 101,
232601 (2012).
74 Y. Nakajima, Y. Tsuchiya, T. Taen, T. Tamegai, S. Okayasu,
and
M. Sasase, "Enhancement of critical current density in Co-doped
BaFe2 As2 with columnar defects introduced by heavy-ion irradiation,"
Phys. Rev. B 80, 012510 (2009).
75 B. Roas, B. Hensel, G. Saemann-Ischenko, and L. Schultz, "Irradiationinduced enhancement of the critical current density of epitaxial
YBa2 Cu3 O7−x thin films," Appl. Phys. Lett. 54, 1051–1053 (1989).
76 N. W. Salovich, H. Kim, A. K. Ghosh, R. W. Giannetta, W. Kwok,
U. Welp, B. Shen, S. Zhu, H.-H. Wen, M. A. Tanatar,
and
R. Prozorov, "Effect of heavy-ion irradiation on superconductivity in
Ba0.6 K0.4 Fe2 As2 ," Phys. Rev. B 87, 180502 (2013).
77 Y. Sun, S. Pyon, T. Tamegai, R. Kobayashi, T. Watashige, S. Kasahara,
Y. Matsuda, T. Shibauchi, and H. Kitamura, "Enhancement of critical
current density and mechanism of vortex pinning in H+ -irradiated FeSe
single crystal," Appl. Phys. Express 8, 113102 (2015).
78 I. Swiecicki, C. Ulysse, T. Wolf, R. Bernard, N. Bergeal, J. Briatico,
G. Faini, J. Lesueur, and J. E. Villegas, "Strong field-matching effects
in superconducting yba2 cu3 o7−δ films with vortex energy landscapes engineered via masked ion irradiation," Phys. Rev. B 85, 224502 (2012).
79 T. Taen, Y. Nakajima, T. Tamegai, and H. Kitamura, "Enhancement of
critical current density and vortex activation energy in proton-irradiated
Co-doped BaFe2 As2 ," Phys. Rev. B 86, 094527 (2012).
80 T. Taen, F. Ohtake, S. Pyon, T. Tamegai, and H. Kitamura, "Critical current density and vortex dynamics in pristine and proton-irradiated Ba0.6
K0.4 Fe2 As2 ," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28, 085003 (2015).

21
81 J.

R. Thompson, Y. R. Sun, H. R. Kerchner, D. K. Christen, B. C. Sales,
B. C. Chakoumakos, A. D. Marwick, L. Civale, and J. O. Thomson,
"Enhanced current density Jc and extended irreversibility in single-crystal
Bi2 Sr2 Ca1 Cu2 O8 via linear defects from heavy ion irradiation," Appl.
Phys. Lett. 60, 2306–2308 (1992).
82 B. M. Vlcek, H. K. Viswanathan, M. C. Frischherz, S. Fleshler, K. Vandervoort, J. Downey, U. Welp, M. A. Kirk, and G. W. Crabtree, "Role of
point defects and their clusters for flux pinning as determined from irradiation and annealing experiments in YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ single crystals," Phys.
Rev. B 48, 4067–4073 (1993).
83 Y. Zhu, Z. X. Cai, R. C. Budhani, M. Suenaga, and D. O. Welch, "Structures and effects of radiation damage in cuprate superconductors irradiated with several-hundred-MeV heavy ions," Phys. Rev. B 48, 6436–6450
(1993).
84 K. J. Leonard, T. Aytug, A. A. Gapud, F. A. L. III, N. T. Greenwood,
Y. Zhang, A. G. Perez-Bergquist, and W. J. Weber, "Irradiation response
of next generation high temperature superconductors for fusion energy applications," Fusion Science and Technology 66, 57–62 (2014).
85 T. Haugan, P. N. Barnes, R. Wheeler, F. Meisenkothen, and M. Sumption, "Addition of nanoparticle dispersions to enhance flux pinning of the
YBa2 Cu3 O7−x superconductor." Nature 430, 867–870 (2004).
86 T. Horide, T. Kawamura, K. Matsumoto, A. Ichinose, M. Yoshizumi,
T. Izumi, and Y. Shiohara, "Jc improvement by double artificial pinning centers of BaSnO3 nanorods and Y2 O3 nanoparticles in YBa2 Cu3 O7
coated conductors," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26, 075019 (2013).
87 M. Miura, B. Maiorov, S. A. Baily, N. Haberkorn, J. O. Willis, K. Marken,
T. Izumi, Y. Shiohara, and L. Civale, "Mixed pinning landscape in
nanoparticle-introduced YGdBa2 Cu3 Oy films grown by metal organic deposition," Phys. Rev. B 83, 184519 (2011).
88 A. Palau, E. Bartolomé, A. Llordés, T. Puig, and X. Obradors, "Isotropic
and anisotropic pinning in TFA-grown YBa2 Cu3 O7−x films with BaZrO3
nanoparticles," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 24, 125010 (2011).
89 S. C. Wimbush, J. H. Durrell, C. F. Tsai, H. Wang, Q. X. Jia, M. G.
Blamire, and J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, "Enhanced critical current
in YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ thin films through pinning by ferromagnetic YFeO3
nanoparticles," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 23, 045019 (2010).
90 M. W. Rupich, S. Sathyamurthy, S. Fleshler, Q. Li, V. Solovyov, T. Ozaki,
U. Welp, W. Kwok, M. Leroux, A. E. Koshelev, D. J. Miller, K. Kihlstrom,
L. Civale, S. Eley, and A. Kayani, "Engineered pinning landscapes for
enhanced 2g coil wire," IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 26, 1–4 (2016).
91 J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, S. R. Foltyn, Q. X. Jia, H. Wang, A. Serquis,
L. Civale, B. Maiorov, M. E. Hawley, M. P. Maley, and D. E. Peterson,
"Strongly enhanced current densities in superconducting coated conductors of YBa2 Cu3 O7–x + BaZrO3 ," Nat. Mater. 3, 439–443 (2004).
92 J. P. Feighan, A. Kursumovic, and J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, "Materials
design for artificial pinning centres in superconductor PLD coated conductors," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 123001 (2017).
93 M. Miura, B. Maiorov, F. F. Balakirev, T. Kato, M. Sato, Y. Takagi,
T. Izumi, and L. Civale, "Upward shift of the vortex solid phase in hightemperature-superconducting wires through high density nanoparticle addition," Sci. Rep. 6, 20436 (2016).
94 M. Miura, B. Maiorov, M. Sato, M. Kanai, T. Kato, T. Kato, T. Izumi,
S. Awaji, P. Mele, M. Kiuchi, and T. Matsushita, "Tuning nanoparticle
size for enhanced functionality in perovskite thin films deposited by metal
organic deposition," NPG Asia Mater. 9, e447 (2017).
95 M. Miura, B. Maiorov, T. Kato, T. Shimode, K. Wada, S. Adachi,
and K. Tanabe, "Strongly enhanced flux pinning in one-step deposition
of BaFe2 (As0.66 P0.33 )2 superconductor films with uniformly dispersed
BaZrO3 nanoparticles," Nat Commun 4, 2499 (2013).
96 B. Maiorov, S. A. Baily, H. Zhou, O. Ugurlu, J. A. Kennison, P. C. Dowden, T. G. Holesinger, S. R. Foltyn, and L. Civale, "Synergetic combination of different types of defect to optimize pinning landscape using
BaZrO3 -doped YBa2 Cu3 O7 ," Nat. Mater. 8, 398–404 (2009).
97 M. V. Feigel'man, V. B. Geshkenbein, A. I. Larkin, and V. M. Vinokur,
"Theory of collective flux creep," Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2303 (1989).
98 R. Willa, J. A. Galvis, J. Benito-Llorens, E. Herrera, I. Guillamon, and
H. Suderow, "Thermal creep induced by cooling a superconducting vortex
lattice," Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 013125 (2020).
99 G. Blatter, V. B. Geshkenbein, and V. M. Vinokur, "Quantum collective
creep," Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3297 (1991).

100 E.

H. Brandt, "The flux-line-lattice in superconductors," Rep. Prog. Phys.
58, 1465 (1995).
101 G. W. Crabtree and D. R. Nelson, "Vortex physics in high-temperature
superconductors," Physics Today 50, 38–45 (1997).
102 T. Nattermann and S. Scheidl, "Vortex-glass phases in type-II superconductors," Advances in Physics 49, 607–704 (2000).
103 G. Blatter and V. B. Geshkenbein, in "The Physics of Superconductors",
Vol 1: Conventional and High-Tc Superconductors, edited by K. Bennemann and J. Ketterson (Springer, Berlin, 2003) p. 726.
104 W.-K. Kwok, U. Welp, A. Glatz, A. E. Koshelev, K. J. Kihlstrom, and
G. W. Crabtree, "Vortices in high-performance high-temperature superconductors," Rep. Prog. Phys, 79, 116501 (2016).
105 E. Brandt, "Computer simulation of vortex pinning in type II superconductors. I. two-dimensional simulation," J. Low Temp. Phys. 53, 41–70
(1983).
106 E. Brandt, "Computer simulation of vortex pinning in type II superconductors. II. random point pins," J. Low Temp. Phys. 53, 71–152 (1983).
107 A. Koshelev, "Numerical simulation of thermal depinning for twodimensional vortex system," Physica C 198, 371–377 (1992).
108 Y. Cao, Z. Jiao, and H. Ying, "Numerical study on the dynamics of a
driven disordered vortex lattice," Phys. Rev. B 62, 4163–4168 (2000).
109 N. D. Scala, E. Olive, Y. Lansac, Y. Fily, and J. C. Soret, "The elastic
depinning transition of vortex lattices in two dimensions," New J. Phys.
14, 123027 (2012).
110 A. E. Koshelev and V. M. Vinokur, "Dynamic melting of the vortex lattice,"
Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 3580–3583 (1994).
111 K. Moon, R. T. Scalettar, and G. T. Zimányi, "Dynamical phases of driven
vortex systems," Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2778–2781 (1996).
112 D. Ertaş and M. Kardar, "Anisotropic scaling in threshold critical dynamics of driven directed lines," Phys. Rev. B 53, 3520–3542 (1996).
113 A. van Otterlo, R. T. Scalettar, G. T. Zimányi, R. Olsson, A. Petrean,
W. Kwok, and V. Vinokur, "Dynamic phases and the peak effect in dirty
type II superconductors," Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2493–2496 (2000).
114 S. Bustingorry, L. F. Cugliandolo, and D. Domı́nguez, "Langevin simulations of the out-of-equilibrium dynamics of vortex glasses in hightemperature superconductors," Phys. Rev. B 75, 024506 (2007).
115 M.-B. Luo and X. Hu, "Depinning and creep motion in glass states of flux
lines," Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 267002 (2007).
116 M.-B. Luo and X. Hu, "Creep of driven flux lines in type-II superconductors," J. Supercond. Nov. Mag. 23, 1055–1057 (2010).
117 A. E. Koshelev and A. B. Kolton, "Theory and simulations on strong pinning of vortex lines by nanoparticles," Phys. Rev. B 84, 104528 (2011).
118 U. Dobramysl, H. Assi, M. Pleimling, and U. Täuber, "Relaxation dynamics in type-II superconductors with point-like and correlated disorder," Eur.
Phys. J. B 86, 228 (2013).
119 A. Schmid, "A time dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation and its applications to a problem of resistivity in the mixed state," Phys. Kondens. Materie
5, 302 (1966).
120 L. P. Gor'kov, "Microscopic derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau equations
in the theory of superconductivity," Sov. Phys. JETP 9, 1364–1367 (1959).
121 M. M. Doria, A. R. de C. Romaguera, M. V. Milosevic, and F. M. Peeters,
"Threefold onset of vortex loops in superconductors with a magnetic core,"
Europhys. Lett. 79, 47006 (2007).
122 I. S. Aranson and L. Kramer, "The world of the complex Ginzburg-Landau
equation," Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 99 (2002).
123 W. D. Gropp, H. G. Kaper, G. K. Leaf, D. M. Levine, M. Palumbo, and
V. M. Vinokur, "Numerical simulation of vortex dynamics in type-ii superconductors," J. Comp. Phys. 123, 254–266 (1995).
124 G. W. Crabtree, D. O. Gunter, H. G. Kaper, A. E. Koshelev, G. K. Leaf,
and V. M. Vinokur, "Numerical simulations of driven vortex systems,"
Phys. Rev. B 61, 1446–1455 (2000).
125 H. Palonen, J. Jäykkä, and P. Paturi, "Modeling reduced field dependence
of critical current density in YBa2 Cu3 O6+x films with nanorods," Phys.
Rev. B 85, 024510 (2012).
126 T. Winiecki and C. S. Adams, "Time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau simulations of the voltage-current characteristic of type-II superconductors with
pinning," Phys. Rev. B 65, 104517 (2002).
127 I. Sadovskyy, A. Koshelev, C. Phillips, D. Karpeyev, and A. Glatz, "Stable
large-scale solver for ginzburg-landau equations for superconductors," J.
Comput. Phys. 294, 639–654 (2015).

22
128 V.

Ortalan, M. Herrera, M. W. Rupich, and N. D. Browning, "Three dimensional analyses of flux pinning centers in Dy-doped YBa2 Cu3 O7−x
coated superconductors by STEM tomography," Phys. C 469, 2052–2059
(2009).
129 M. Herrera, V. Ortalan, D. G. Morgan, N. D. Browning, and M. W.
Rupich, "Observation of the three-dimensional distribution of flux pinning
centers in dy-doped YBa2 Cu3 O7−x coated conductors," J. Appl. Phys. 103,
084301 (2008).
130 E. B. Sonin and B. Horovitz, "Thermal and quantum creep of vortices
trapped by twin boundaries and columnar defects," Phys. Rev. B 51, 6526–
6530 (1995).
131 G. Blatter and V. Geshkenbein, "Quantum collective creep: Effects of
anisotropy, layering, and finite temperature," Phys. Rev. B 47, 2725–2741
(1993).
132 E. M. Chudnovsky, A. Ferrera, and A. Vilenkin, "Quantum depinning of
flux lines from columnar defects," Phys. Rev. B 51, 1181–1184 (1995).
133 J. J. Åkerman, E. L. Venturini, M. P. Siegal, S. H. Yun, U. O. Karlsson,
and K. V. Rao, "Two-stage crossover from thermal to quantum flux creep
of dilute vortex ensembles in various high-Tc superconducting thin films,"
Phys. Rev. B 64, 094509 (2001).
134 I. Landau and H. Ott, "Crossover from thermally activated flux creep to
quantum tunneling of vortices in a yba2 cu3 o7−x film," Physica C: Supercond. 340, 251–260 (2000).
135 S. Luo, C. Li, Y. He, G. Zhang, D. Jin, Z. Chen, G. Xiong, G. Lian, D. Yin,
and C. E. Gough, "Magnetic relaxation study of macroscopic quantum tunnelling in YBCO films," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 15, 1300–1303 (2002).
136 A. F. T. Hoekstra, A. M. Testa, G. Doornbos, J. C. Martinez, B. Dam,
R. Griessen, B. I. Ivlev, M. Brinkmann, K. Westerholt, W. K. Kwok, and
G. W. Crabtree, "Temperature and magnetic-field dependence of quantum
creep in various high-Tc superconductors," Phys. Rev. B 59, 7222–7237
(1999).
137 J. Tejada, E. M. Chudnovsky, and A. Garcı́a, "Quantum tunneling of vortices in the tl2 caba2 cu2 o8 superconductor," Phys. Rev. B 47, 11552–11554
(1993).
138 T. Klein, H. Grasland, H. Cercellier, P. Toulemonde, and C. Marcenat,
"Vortex creep down to 0.3 k in superconducting fe(te,se) single crystals,"
Phys. Rev. B 89, 014514 (2014).
139 A. N. Lykov, "On the possibility of explaining the high rate of flux creep at
ultra-low temperatures using the anderson model," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26, 055023 (2013).
140 M. Nicodemi and H. Jeldtoft Jensen, "Creep of superconducting vortices
in the limit of vanishing temperature: A fingerprint of off-equilibrium dynamics," Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4378–4381 (2001).
141 N. Haberkorn, J. Kim, B. Maiorov, I. Usov, G. F. Chen, W. Yu, and
L. Civale, "Increment of the collective pinning energy in na1−x cax fe2 as2
single crystals with random point defects introduced by proton irradiation,"
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 27, 095004 (2014).
142 L. Civale, "Pushing the limits for the highest critical currents in superconductors," PNAS 116, 10201–10203 (2019).
143 V. Selvamanickam, M. H. Gharahcheshmeh, A. Xu, Y. Zhang, and E. Galstyan, "Critical current density above 15 macm−2 at 30k, 3t in 2.2μm
thick heavily-doped (gd,y)ba2 cu3 ox superconductor tapes," Supercond.
Sci. Technol. 28, 072002 (2015).
144 T. Matsushita, Flux Pinning in Superconductors (Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg, 2007).
145 Y.-L. Wang, A. Glatz, G. J. Kimmel, I. S. Aranson, L. R. Thoutam, Z.L. Xiao, G. R. Berdiyorov, F. M. Peeters, G. W. Crabtree, and W.-K.
Kwok, "Parallel magnetic field suppresses dissipation in superconducting
nanostrips," PNAS 114, E10274–E10280 (2017).
146 R. Willa, On type-II superconductors: Geometric barrier and bulk vortex
pinning (ETH Research Collections, 2016).
147 A. Gurevich, "Enhancement of rf breakdown field of superconductors by
multilayer coating," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 012511 (2006).
148 H. Padamsee, RF Superconductivity (Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
KGaA., 2009).
149 H. Padamsee, "50 years of success for SRF accelerators-a review," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 053003 (2017).
150 A. Grassellino, A. Romanenko, Y. Trenikhina, M. Checchin, M. Martinello, O. S. Melnychuk, S. Chandrasekaran, D. A. Sergatskov, S. Posen,
A. C. Crawford, S. Aderhold, and D. Bice, "Unprecedented quality factors

at accelerating gradients up to 45 MVm-1in niobium superconducting resonators via low temperature nitrogen infusion," Supercond. Sci. Technol.
30, 094004 (2017).
151 J. Kroll, F. Borsoi, V. D. Enden, W. Ulihoom, D. De Jong, M. QuinteroPerez, D. Van Woerkom, A. Bruno, S. Plissard, D. Car, E. Bakkers,
M. Cassidy, and L. P. Kouwenhoven, "Magnetic-field-resilient superconducting coplanar-waveguide resonators for hybrid circuit quantum electrodynamics experiments," Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 064053 (2019).
152 J. Martinis, M. Ansmann, and J. Aumentado, "Energy Decay in Superconducting Josephson-Junction Qubits from Nonequilibrium Quasiparticle Excitations," Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 097002 (2009).
153 D. Finke, " Quantum Computing Report: Qubit Scorecard ," https:
//quantumcomputingreport.com/scorecards/qubit-quality/
(2019), [Online; accessed 20-April-2019].
154 D. J. Van Harlingen, B. L. T. Plourde, T. L. Robertson, P. A. Reichardt,
and J. Clarke, "Decoherence in flux qubits due to 1/f noise in josephson
junctions," in Quantum Computing and Quantum Bits in Mesoscopic Systems, edited by A. Leggett, B. Ruggiero, and P. Silvestrini (Springer US,
2004) 1st ed., pp. 171–184.
155 N. Samkharadze, A. Bruno, P. Scarlino, G. Zheng, D. P. DiVincenzo,
L. DiCarlo, and L. M. K. Vandersypen, "High-kinetic-inductance superconducting nanowire resonators for circuit qed in a magnetic field," Phys.
Rev. Applied 5, 044004 (2016).
156 A. Schneider, T. Wolz, M. Pfirrmann, M. Spiecker, H. Rotzinger, A. V.
Ustinov, and M. Weides, "Transmon qubit in a magnetic field: Evolution
of coherence and transition frequency," Phys. Rev. Res. 1, 023003 (2019).
157 D. Bothner, D. Wiedmaier, B. Ferdinand, R. Kleiner, and D. Koelle, "Improving superconducting resonators in magnetic fields by reduced field
focussing and engineered flux screening," Phys. Rev. Applied 8, 034025
(2017).
158 D. Bothner, T. Gaber, M. Kemmler, D. Koelle, and R. Kleiner, "Improving the performance of superconducting microwave resonators in magnetic
fields," Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 102504 (2011).
159 D. Bothner, C. Clauss, E. Koroknay, M. Kemmler, T. Gaber, M. Jetter,
M. Scheffler, P. Michler, M. Dressel, D. Koelle, and R. Kleiner, "Reducing
vortex losses in superconducting microwave resonators with microsphere
patterned antidot arrays," Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 012601 (2012).
160 B. Chiaro, A. Megrant, A. Dunsworth, Z. Chen, R. Barends, B. Campbell,
Y. Chen, A. Fowler, I. C. Hoi, E. Jeffrey, J. Kelly, J. Mutus, C. Neill, P. J. J.
O'Malley, C. Quintana, P. Roushan, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner,
T. C. White, and J. M. Martinis, "Dielectric surface loss in superconducting resonators with flux-trapping holes," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 29,
104006 (2016).
161 S. Kwon, A. Fadavi Roudsari, O. W. B. Benningshof, Y.-C. Tang, H. R.
Mohebbi, I. A. J. Taminiau, D. Langenberg, S. Lee, G. Nichols, D. G.
Cory, and G.-X. Miao, "Magnetic field dependent microwave losses in superconducting niobium microstrip resonators," J. Appl. Phys. 124, 033903
(2018), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5027003.
162 M. A. Golosovsky, H. J. Snortland, and M. R. Beasley, "Nonlinear microwave properties of superconducting Nb microstrip resonators," Phys.
Rev. B 51, 6462 (1995).
163 J. M. Sage, V. Bolkhovsky, W. D. Oliver, B. Turek, and P. B. Welander, "
Study of loss in superconducting coplanar waveguide resonators ," J. Appl.
Phys. 109, 063915 (2011).
164 S. Ohya, B. Chiaro, A. Megrant, C. Neill, R. Barends, Y. Chen, J. Kelly,
D. Low, J. Mutus, P. O'Malley, P. Roushan, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher,
J. Wenner, T. C. White, Y. Yin, B. D. Schultz, C. J. Palmstro/m, B. a.
Mazin, A. N. Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, "Room temperature deposition of sputtered TiN films for superconducting coplanar waveguide resonators," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 27, 015009 (2014).
165 M. R. Vissers, J. S. Kline, J. Gao, D. S. Wisbey, and D. P. Pappas, "Reduced microwave loss in trenched superconducting coplanar waveguides,"
Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 082602 (2012).
166 H. G. Leduc, B. Bumble, P. K. Day, B. H. Eom, J. Gao, S. Golwala,
B. A. Mazin, S. McHugh, A. Merrill, D. C. Moore, O. Noroozian, A. D.
Turner, and J. Zmuidzinas, "Titanium nitride films for ultrasensitive microresonator detectors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 102509 (2013).
167 M. Sandberg, M. R. Vissers, J. S. Kline, M. Weides, J. Gao, D. S. Wisbey, and D. P. Pappas, "Etch induced microwave losses in titanium nitride
superconducting resonators," Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 262605 (2012).

23
168 J.

B. Chang, M. R. Vissers, A. D. Córcoles, M. Sandberg, J. Gao, D. W.
Abraham, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, M. Beth Rothwell, G. A. Keefe,
M. Steffen, and D. P. Pappas, "Improved superconducting qubit coherence
using titanium nitride," Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 012602 (2013).
169 A. J. Kerman, E. Dauler, W. Keicher, J. Yang, K. Berggren, G. Gol'tsman,
and B. B. Voronov, "Kinetic-inductance-limited reset time of superconducting nanowire photon counters," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 111116 (2006).
170 R. Barends, N. Vercruyssen, A. Endo, P. J. de Visser, T. Zijlstra,
T. M. Klapwijk, and J. J. A. Baselmans, "Reduced frequency noise
in superconducting resonators," Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 033507 (2010),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3467052.
171 R. Barends, N. Vercruyssen, A. Endo, P. J. de Visser, T. Zijlstra, P. Diener,
S. J. C. Yates, and J. J. A. Baselmans, " Minimal resonator loss for circuit
quantum electrodynamics," Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 023508 (2010).
172 A. Bruno, G. De Lange, S. Asaad, K. L. Van Der Enden, N. K. Langford,
and L. Dicarlo, "Reducing intrinsic loss in superconducting resonators by
surface treatment and deep etching of silicon substrates," Appl. Phys. Lett.
106, 182601 (2015).
173 E. Dumur, B. Delsol, T. Weissl, B. Kung, W. Guichard, C. Hoarau,
C. Naud, K. Hasselbach, O. Buisson, K. Ratter, and B. Gilles, "Epitaxial
rhenium microwave resonators," IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 26, 1–9
(2016).
174 H. Wang, M. Hofheinz, J. Wenner, M. Ansmann, R. C. Bialczak,
M. Lenander, E. Lucero, , M. Neeley, A. D. O'Connell, D. Sank, M. Weides, A. Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, "Improving the coherence time of superconducting coplanar resonators," Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 233508 (2009).
175 M. R. Vissers, J. Gao, D. S. Wisbey, D. A. Hite, C. C. Tsuei, A. D.
Corcoles, M. Steffen, and D. P. Pappas, "Low loss superconducting titanium nitride coplanar waveguide resonators," Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 232509
(2010).
176 K. H. Kuit, J. R. Kirtley, W. van der Veur, C. G. Molenaar, F. J. G.
Roesthuis, A. G. P. Troeman, J. R. Clem, H. Hilgenkamp, H. Rogalla,
and J. Flokstra, "Vortex trapping and expulsion in thin-film yba2 cu3 o7−δ
strips," Phys. Rev. B 77, 134504 (2008).
177 C.-X. Liu, D. E. Liu, F.-C. Zhang, and C.-K. Chiu, "Protocol for reading
out majorana vortex qubits and testing non-abelian statistics," Phys. Rev.
Appl. 12, 054035 (2019).
178 E. Grosfeld and A. Stern, "Observing majorana bound states of josephson vortices in topological superconductors," PNAS 108, 11810–11814
(2011).
179 S. R. Lee, P. A. Sharma, A. L. Lima-Sharma, W. Pan, and T. M. Nenoff,
"Topological quantum materials for realizing majorana quasiparticles,"
Chemistry of Materials 31, 26–51 (2019).
180 J. Q. You, Z. D. Wang, W. Zhang, and F. Nori, "Encoding a qubit with
Majorana modes in superconducting circuits," Sci. Rep. 4, 5535 (2014).
181 M. Cheng, R. M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma, "Topological protection of
majorana qubits," Phys. Rev. B 85, 165124 (2012).
182 J. C. Budich, S. Walter, and B. Trauzettel, "Failure of protection of majorana based qubits against decoherence," Phys. Rev. B 85, 121405 (2012).
183 S. Vijay and L. Fu, "Teleportation-based quantum information processing
with majorana zero modes," Phys. Rev. B 94, 235446 (2016).
184 J. Alicea, "New directions in the pursuit of majorana fermions in solid state
systems," Rep. Prog. Phys, 75, 076501 (2012).
185 C.-K. Chiu, T. Machida, Y. Huang, T. Hanaguri, and F.-C. Zhang, "Scalable majorana vortex modes in iron-based superconductors," Sci. Adv. 6
(2020), 10.1126/sciadv.aay0443.
186 A. Ghazaryan, P. L. S. Lopes, P. Hosur, M. J. Gilbert, and P. Ghaemi,
"Effect of zeeman coupling on the majorana vortex modes in iron-based
topological superconductors," Phys. Rev. B 101, 020504 (2020).
187 S. Manna, P. Wei, Y. Xie, K. T. Law, P. A. Lee, and J. S. Moodera, "Signature of a pair of majorana zero modes in superconducting gold surface
states," PNAS 117, 8775–8782 (2020).
188 S. Vaitiekenas, G. W. Winkler, B. van Heck, T. Karzig, M.-T. Deng,
K. Flensberg, L. I. Glazman, C. Nayak, P. Krogstrup, R. M. Lutchyn, and
C. M. Marcus, "Flux-induced topological superconductivity in full-shell
nanowires," Science 367 (2020), 10.1126/science.aav3392.
189 H.-H. Sun, K.-W. Zhang, L.-H. Hu, C. Li, G.-Y. Wang, H.-Y. Ma, Z.-A.
Xu, C.-L. Gao, D.-D. Guan, Y.-Y. Li, C. Liu, D. Qian, Y. Zhou, L. Fu, S.C. Li, F.-C. Zhang, and J.-F. Jia, "Majorana zero mode detected with spin
selective andreev reflection in the vortex of a topological superconductor,"

Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 257003 (2016).
Obradors and T. Puig, "Coated conductors for power applications: materials challenges," Supercond. Sci. Technol. 27, 044003 (2014).
191 G. Majkic, R. Pratap, E. Galstyan, A. Xu, Y. Zhang, and V. Selvamanickam, "Engineering of nanorods for superior in field performance of 2ghts conductor utilizing advanced mocvd reactor," IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 27, 1–5 (2017).
192 K. Crombecq, D. Gorissen, D. Deschrijver, and T. Dhaene, "A novel
hybrid sequential design strategy for global surrogate modeling of computer experiments," SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 33, 1948–1974
(2011).
193 M. P. A. Fisher, "Vortex-glass superconductivity: A possible new phase in
bulk high-Tc oxides," Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1415 (1989).
194 D. S. Fisher, M. P. A. Fisher, and D. A. Huse, "Thermal fluctuations,
quenched disorder, phase transitions, and transport in type-II superconductors," Phys. Rev. B 43, 130 (1991).
195 D. R. Nelson, "Vortex entanglement in high-T superconductors," Phys.
c
Rev. Lett. 60, 1973 (1988).
196 E. H. Brandt, "Thermal fluctuation and melting of the vortex lattice in
oxide superconductors," Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1106 (1989).
197 A. Houghton, R. A. Pelcovits, and A. Sudbø, "Flux lattice melting in
high-Tc superconductors," Phys. Rev. B 40, 6763 (1989).
198 P. E. Batson, N. Dellby, and O. L. Krivanek, "Sub-ångstrom resolution
using aberration corrected electron optics," Nature 418, 617–620 (2002).
199 H. Rose, "Prospects for aberration-free electron microscopy," Ultramicroscopy 103, 1–6 (2005), proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Frontiers of Electron Microscopy in Materials Science.
200 U. Dahmen, R. Erni, V. Radmilovic, C. Ksielowski, M.-D. Rossell, and
P. Denes, "Background, status and future of the transmission electron
aberration-corrected microscope project," Philos. Trans. A Math. Phys.
Eng. Sci. 367, 3795–3808 (2009).
201 C. Ophus, "A fast image simulation algorithm for scanning transmission
electron microscopy," ASCI 3, 13 (2017).
202 C. Kisielowski, B. Freitag, M. Bischoff, H. van Lin, S. Lazar, G. Knippels,
P. Tiemeijer, M. van der Stam, S. von Harrach, M. Stekelenburg, and
et al., "Detection of single atoms and buried defects in three dimensions
by aberration-corrected electron microscope with 0.5-å information limit,"
Microsc. Microanal. 14, 469–477 (2008).
203 R. Erni, M. D. Rossell, C. Kisielowski, and U. Dahmen, "Atomicresolution imaging with a sub-50-pm electron probe," Phys. Rev. Lett. 102,
096101 (2009).
204 N. Alem, R. Erni, C. Kisielowski, M. D. Rossell, W. Gannett, and A. Zettl,
"Atomically thin hexagonal boron nitride probed by ultrahigh-resolution
transmission electron microscopy," Phys. Rev. B 80, 155425 (2009).
205 N. Shibata, "Atomic-resolution differential phase contrast electron microscopy," J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn 127, 708–714 (2019).
206 C. Ophus, "Four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy
(4d-stem): From scanning nanodiffraction to ptychography and beyond,"
Microsc. Microanal. 25, 563–582 (2019).
207 M. Ziatdinov, O. Dyck, A. Maksov, X. Li, X. Sang, K. Xiao, R. R. Unocic,
R. Vasudevan, S. Jesse, and S. V. Kalinin, "Deep Learning of Atomically
Resolved Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy Images: Chemical Identification and Tracking Local Transformations," ACS Nano 11,
12742–12752 (2017).
208 J. Miao, P. Ercius, and S. J. L. Billinge, "Atomic electron tomography: 3d
structures without crystals," Science 353 (2016), 10.1126/science.aaf2157.
209 M. Schaffer, B. Schaffer, and Q. Ramasse, "Sample preparation for
atomic-resolution stem at low voltages by fib," Ultramicroscopy 114, 62–
71 (2012).
210 T. Petersen, M. Miller, T. Kelly, K. Rajan, and S. Ringer, "A new approach to electron tomography for the atom project," Microsc. Microanal.
17, 956–957 (2011).
211 T. Kelly and M. Miller, "Atom probe tomography," Review of Scientific
Instruments 78, 031101 (2007).
212 D. W. Gidley, H.-G. Peng, and R. S. Vallery, "Positron annihilation as
a method to characterize porous materials," Annual Review of Materials
Research 36, 49–79 (2006).
213 P. Or, D. Dribin, D. Cohen, G. Erlichman, E. Cohen, O. Hen, E. Piasetzky,
I. Sabo-Napadensky, H. Steinberg, S. M.-T. Beck, and G. Ron, "Spot
il - slow positron facility in israel," AIP Conference Proceedings 2182,
190 X.

24
040009 (2019).
Stráský, M. Janeček, I. Semenova, J. Čı́žek, K. Bartha, P. Harcuba,
V. Polyakova, and S. Gatina, "4.5 - microstructure and lattice defects in
ultrafine grained biomedical α + β and metastable β ti alloys," in Titanium
in Medical and Dental Applications, Woodhead Publishing Series in Biomaterials, edited by F. H. Froes and M. Qian (Woodhead Publishing, 2018)
pp. 455–475.
215 P. Schultz and K. Lynn, "Interaction of positron beams with surfaces, thin
films, and interfaces," Rev. Mod. Phys. 60 (1988).
216 R. Pethrick, "Positron annihilation-a probe for nanoscale voids and free
volume?" Prog. Polym. Sci. 22, 1–47 (1997).
217 P. J. Schultz and K. G. Lynn, "Interaction of positron beams with surfaces,
thin films, and interfaces," Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 701–779 (1988).
218 A. Wagner, M. Butterling, M. O. Liedke, K. Potzger, and R. KrauseRehberg, "Positron annihilation lifetime and doppler broadening spectroscopy at the elbe facility," AIP Conference Proceedings 1970, 040003
(2018).
219 H.-G. Peng, W. E. Frieze, R. S. Vallery, D. W. Gidley, D. L. Moore, and
R. J. Carter, "Revealing hidden pore structure in nanoporous thin films
using positronium annihilation lifetime spectroscopy," Appl. Phys. Lett.
86, 121904 (2005).
220 A. David, G. Kögel, P. Sperr, and W. Triftshäuser, "Lifetime measurements with a scanning positron microscope," Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 067402
(2001).
221 T. Gigl, L. Beddrich, M. Dickmann, B. Rienäcker, M. Thalmayr, S. Vohburger, and C. Hugenschmidt, "Defect imaging and detection of precipitates using a new scanning positron microbeam," New Journal of Physics
19, 123007 (2017).
222 M. McDowell, K. Jungjohann, and U. Celano, "Dynamic nanomaterials phenomena investigated with in situ transmission electron microscopy:
A nano letters virtual issue," Nano Lett. 18, 657–659 (2018), pMID:
29444554.
223 B. H. Goodge, E. Bianco, N. Schnitzer, H. W. Zandbergen, and L. F.
Kourkoutis, "Atomic-resolution cryo-stem across continuously variable
temperatures," Microsc. Microanal. 26, 439–446 (2020).
224 "Cryogenic Temperature Controlled Electrical Biasing In-situ TEM
Sample Platform," https://www.sbir.gov/sbirsearch/detail/
1618809 (2019), accessed: 2021-01-04.
225 M. L. Taheri, E. A. Stach, I. Arslan, P. A. Crozier, B. C. Kabius, T. LaGrange, A. M. Minor, S. Takeda, M. Tanase, J. B. Wagner, and R. Sharma,
"Current status and future directions for in situ transmission electron microscopy," Ultramicroscopy 170, 86–95 (2016).
226 O. Kamimura, H. Kasai, T. Akashi, T. Matsuda, K. Harada, J. Masuko, T. Yoshida, N. Osakabe, A. Tonomura, M. Beleggia, G. Pozzi, J.i. Shimoyama, K. Kishio, T. Hanaguri, K. Kitazawa, M. Sasase, and
S. Okayasu, "Direct evidence of the anisotropic structure of vortices interacting with columnar defects in high-temperature superconductors through
the analysis of lorentz images," J. Phys. Soc. Jpn 71, 1840–1843 (2002).
227 A. Tonomura, "The Aharonov-Bohm effect and its applications to electron
phase microscopy," Proc. Jpn. Acad. Ser. B 82, 45–58 (2006).
228 K. Harada, J. Endo, N. Osakabe, and A. Tonomura, "Direction-Free Magnetic Field Application System," e-J. Surf. Sci. Nanotech. 6, 29–34 (2008).
229 T. Kawasaki, T. Yoshida, T. Matsuda, N. Osakabe, A. Tonomura, I. Matsui, and K. Kitazawa, "Fine crystal lattice fringes observed using a transmission electron microscope with 1 mev coherent electron waves," Appl.
Phys. Lett. 76, 1342–1344 (2000).
214 J.

230 K.

Harada, "Vortex matter research by electron microscopy – memorial to
dr. akira tonomura –," Physics Procedia 45, 1–4 (2013), proceedings of the
25th International Symposium on Superconductivity (ISS2012).
231 A. Tonomura, H. Kasai, O. Kamimura, T. Matsuda, K. Harada, T. Yoshida,
T. Akashi, J. Shimoyama, K. Kishio, T. Hanaguri, K. Kitazawa, T. Masui, S. Tajima, N. Koshizuka, P. L. Gammel, D. Bishop, M. Sasase, and
S. Okayasu, "Observation of structures of chain vortices inside anisotropic
high- Tc superconductors," Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 237001 (2002).
232 A. Tonomura, H. Kasai, O. Kamimura, T. Matsuda, K. Harada,
Y. Nakayama, J. Shimoyama, K. Kishio, T. Hanaguri, K. Kitazawa,
M. Sasase, and S. Okayasu, "Observation of individual vortices trapped
along columnar defects in high-temperature superconductors," Nature 412,
620–622 (2001).
233 A. Lubk and J. Zweck, "Differential phase contrast: An integral perspective," Phys. Rev. A 91, 023805 (2015).
234 N. Dekkers and H. de Lang, "Differential Phase Contrast in a STEM,"
Optik 41, 452 (1974).
235 J. N. Chapman, P. E. Batson, E. M. Waddell, and R. P. Ferrier, "The direct determination of magnetic domain wall profiles by differential phase
contrast electron microscopy," Ultramicroscopy 3, 203 (1978).
236 S. J. Lee, H. J. Lee, K. Song, S. Y. Choi, and H. Park, "In-situ Observation
of Domain Wall Motion in Electroplated Ni80-Fe20 Thin Film by Lorentz
TEM and DPC Imaging," J. Magn. 22, 563–569 (2017).
237 C. Chen, H. Li, T. Seki, D. Yin, G. Sanchez-Santolino, K. Inoue, N. Shibata, and Y. Ikuhara, "Direct Determination of Atomic Structure and Magnetic Coupling of Magnetite Twin Boundaries," ACS Nano. 12, 2662–2668
(2018).
238 S. McVitie, S. Hughes, K. Fallon, S. McFadzean, D. McGrouther, M. Krajnak, W. Legrand, D. Maccariello, S. Collin, K. Garcia, N. Reyren, V. Cros,
A. Fert, K. Zeissler, and C. H. Marrows, "A transmission electron microscope study of Néel skyrmion magnetic textures in multilayer thin film
systems with large interfacial chiral interaction," Sci. Rep. 8, 5703 (2018).
239 T. Matsumoto, Y.-G. So, Y. Kohno, H. Sawada, Y. Ikuhara, and N. Shibata,
"Direct observation of σ 7 domain boundary core structure in magnetic
skyrmion lattice," Sci. Adv. 2 (2016), 10.1126/sciadv.1501280.
240 S. Schneider, D. Wolf, M. J. Stolt, S. Jin, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus,
M. Schmidt, B. Büchner, S. T. B. Goennenwein, K. Nielsch, and A. Lubk,
"Induction mapping of the 3d-modulated spin texture of skyrmions in thin
helimagnets," Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 217201 (2018).
241 K. Müller, F. F. Krause, A. Béché, M. Schowalter, V. Galioit, S. Löffler,
J. Verbeeck, J. Zweck, P. Schattschneider, and A. Rosenauer, "Atomic
electric fields revealed by a quantum mechanical approach to electron picodiffraction," Nat. Commun. 5, 5653 (2014).
242 J. A. Hachtel, J. C. Idrobo, and M. Chi, "Sub-Ångstrom electric field
measurements on a universal detector in a scanning transmission electron
microscope," ASCI 4, 10 (2018).
243 N. Shibata, S. D. Findlay, Y. Kohno, H. Sawada, Y. Kondo, and Y. Ikuhara,
"Differential phase-contrast microscopy at atomic resolution," Nat. Phys.
8, 611–615 (2012).
244 N. Shibata, T. Seki, G. Sánchez-Santolino, S. D. Findlay, Y. Kohno,
T. Matsumoto, R. Ishikawa, and Y. Ikuhara, "Electric field imaging of
single atoms," Nat. Commun. 8, 15631 (2017).
245 E. Yücelen, I. Lazić, and E. G. T. Bosch, "Phase contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy imaging of light and heavy atoms at the limit
of contrast and resolution," Sci. Rep. 8, 2676 (2018).

