Coupling purposes with status-functions in
artificial institutions?
Rafhael R. Cunha1[0000−0003−3233−5158] , Jomi F. Hübner1[0000−0001−9355−822X] ,
and Maiquel de Brito2[0000−0003−4650−7416]

arXiv:2105.00090v1 [cs.MA] 30 Apr 2021

1

Automation and Systems Department, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
Florianópolis, Brazil
rafhael.cunha@posgrad.ufsc.br
jomi.hubner@ufsc.br
2
Control, Automation, and Computation Engineering Department, Federal
University of Santa Catarina, Blumenau, Brazil
maiquel.b@ufsc.br

Abstract. In multi-agent systems, the agents may have goals that depend on a social, shared interpretation about the facts occurring in the
system. These are the so-called social goals. Artificial institutions provide such a social interpretation by assigning statuses to the concrete
elements that compose the system. These statuses are supposed to enable the assignee element to perform functions that are not exclusively
inherent to their design features. However, the enabled functions are not
explicit in the existing models of artificial institutions. As a consequence,
(i) agents may have difficulties to reasoning about how to achieve their
own social goals with the help of artificial institutions and (ii) these institutions are not well instrumented to receive incoming agents, in the
case of open systems. Considering those problems, this paper proposes
a model to express the functions – or the purposes – associated with
the status-functions helping the agents to reason about their social goals
and the institution. We evaluate the model by using it in some scenarios,
showing how the agents can use purposes to reason about the satisfaction
of their social goals in institutional contexts and how the institution can
be flexible enough to support new agents operating in the system.
Keywords: purposes * status-functions * artificial institutions * multiagent systems.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent systems (MAS) are systems composed of autonomous computational
entities, henceforth referred to as agents, that can interact within a dynamic
environment to achieve their common and individual goals [38]. The interaction
among the agents is in the very core of MAS, making it a useful approach to
?

Supported by Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Rio Grande
do Sul (IFRS).

2

Cunha. Rafhael R, et al.

handle computational problems involving social aspects [36]. One of these aspects
is a shared interpretation about the facts occurring in the system. For example,
consider a scenario where (i) the agent Bob has the goal of having a book and
(ii) the agent Tom desires to sell a book. To this end, (i) Bob needs to execute
an action that means giving a value and in return receive a good, and (ii) Tom
waits for such action to then deliver the book. In this scenario, both goals are
social goals because they can not be achieved alone and depend on a common
interpretation involving certain facts. Without such common interpretation, Bob
might not know which action to perform to give a value in exchange for the book.
Even this would not be the case, Tom might not acknowledge the action of Bob,
refusing thus to deliver the book. The highlighted problem therefore involves
social aspects.
Inspired by human societies, some works propose models and tools to provide
this kind of interpretation to computer systems and, in particular, to MAS [18].
They usually consider that the elements involved in the interaction among the
agents constitute (or count as) institutional concepts, that are the common interpretation of those concrete elements [8,7,6,13]). For example, agents acting in
an e-commerce scenario may constitute (or count as) buyers, while some of their
actions may count as payments. These institutional concepts are referred in the
literature as status-functions: they are status that assign functions to the concrete elements [31,30]. For example, the status buyer assigns to an agent some
functions such as perform payments, take loans, etc. Artificial Institutions are
the component of the MAS that is responsible for defining the conditions for an
agent to become a buyer, or an action to become a payment [31,30].
The existing works on Artificial Institutions are more concerned with specifying and managing the constitution of status-functions. However, they focus
more on the status than the function. While the status is explicit, the function
is implicit. In other words, the works described in the literature, as far as we
know, do not provide the means for the institution to express the functions associated with the status explicitly. The main drawbacks of this limitation are: (i)
the agents cannot reason about the functions performed by the elements that
carry the status and (ii) the institutions may be incompatible 3 with the agents'
specification.
The limitations discussed earlier have some implications. First, different agents
may have problems to achieve similar social goals if their goals are internally
identified by different terms, even if they are acting in the same environment
and institution. It is especially critical in open MAS, where the agents can be
designed and implemented by different parties and it is not possible to predict,
in design time, neither the number, nor the behaviour, nor the way the agent
3

Compatibility in this work refers to the situation in which the vocabulary used in the
specification of the agents works properly with the vocabulary of the institutional
specification. Compatibility can occur in several ways, including (i) if the vocabulary
present in the agent's specification is identical to the institutional vocabulary or (ii)
if the programmer encodes compatibility with the institutional specification within
the agent.

Coupling purposes with status-functions in artificial institutions

3

shall interact among themselves and explore the available resources [17,25]. For
example, in the book store scenario, the payment status-function can have the
function of leading the system to a state where the agent that executes an action
that counts as payment has the book. In this case, have a book is the function of
the payment status-function interpreted from the agents' perspective. It is also
the Bob's social goal. Consider that Alice joins the book store scenario. Alice
has the social goal of acquiring a book. Both Bob and Alice's have similar social goals. However, if the functions associated to the status-functions are not
explicit, Alice will only reach her social goal if her code includes the goal of
having a book, similar to Bob. Second, the same agent may not reach his social goal if it moves itself to a new environment and institution similar to the
previous with the same goal. For example, consider a new scenario in the system called a library. In it, have a book is the function of a status-function other
than payment. When entering this system, Bob will not achieve his social goal
because there is no payment status-function there, and he was coded for that
very status-function of the book store. Then, Bob will only reach his social goal
if he performs the action with the status-functions associated with his social
goal in that institution. Third, the same institution may not be compatible with
different agents with similar social objectives but coded with other terms. This
is the same limitation as to the previous example but seen from the institution's
perspective. The institution needs to add new status-functions compatible with
agents' specifications to its specification to get around this problem. However,
some status-functions can make it inconsistent. For example, it is not possible
to specify the payment status-function in a library that only lends books.
Although the work on artificial institutions focus on supporting the regulation of the system, institutions also need to help agents through constitutive
rules, status-functions, etc. to achieve their social goals [29]. These examples
show that the institutions as they are currently conceived do not specify the
functions associated with the status-functions. They do not support the reasoning of agents [29] concerning the satisfaction of their own social objectives and
are not prepared to receive agents designed by different developers. Thus, the
main contribution of this paper is a model based on the notion of purpose to
explicitly represent the functions of the status-functions and to relate them to
the social goals of the agents. It is inspired by the "Construction of the Social
Reality" by John Searle [31,30] and "Documentality" by Maurizio Ferraris [11]
both philosophers' theories that seem to be fundamental for comprehend the
social reality.
This paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 introduces the main background
concepts necessary to understanding our proposal and its position in the literature. It includes philosophical theories and related works. Sect. 3 presents the
proposed model and its required interfaces. Sect. 4 evaluates the proposal based
on some examples that allow us to identify some limitations and advantages
that the model offers on the agent and institutional perspective. Finally, Sect. 5
presents some conclusions about this work and suggests future works.

4

2

Cunha. Rafhael R, et al.

Background

This section presents the main concepts used in our approach. Subsection 2.1
presents the philosophical concepts that support our contribution. Subsection 2.2
briefly describes the state of the art on artificial institutions with respect of the
explicit representation of the functions associated to the institutional concepts.
2.1

Institutions according to philosophical theories

An institution is composed of institutional facts [31,30]. These are based on
status-functions and constitutive rules. Status-functions are statuses that have
associated functions. These statuses enable concrete elements to perform functions (associated with the statuses) that cannot be explained through their physical virtues. Constitutive rules specify the assignment of status-functions to concrete elements with the following formula: X count-as Y in C. For example,
a piece of paper count-as money in a bank, where X represents the concrete
element, Y the status-function and C the context where that attribute is valid.
Statuses are imposed on objects when the status-related functions meet some
Purpose. The functions are called agentive functions because they are assigned
from practical interests of the agents [31, p.20]. These practical interests of agents
are called Purposes. Since the institution is formed by people (i.e., agents) and
their collective agreements [31], it is possible to say that the agents themselves
(through their purposes) assign meaning to the status-functions. In other words,
a purpose is the interpretation of a function performed by an element that carries a status from the agents' perspective. For example, someone has the purpose
of winning a chess game when it leads the chessboard to a circumstance that
count-as a checkmate. This purpose does not occur naturally. It is attributed
through the practical interests of the agents playing the game (i.e., under that
context). Fundamentally, both agents involved in the game must have the same
understanding of these facts (i.e., about the function and their purpose). Otherwise, none of them achieve their social goal. Searle asserts that someone must
be capable of understanding what the thing is for, or the function could never be
assigned [31, p.22]. Understanding a function requires to understand for what it
serves (i.e., its purpose). In the case of chess game, the purpose of moving the
piece to a checkmating position is to win the game. This purpose is in line with
the interests of the agents who are playing the game (i.e., its is understood by
the people involved in the institution).
While Searle suggests that status-functions are a consequence of collective
intentionality, their origin remains, at least in part, unexplained. For example,
throughout history, human societies agreed on assigning the function of money
to a piece of paper, a shell or a portion of salt. However, the function seems
not having a genesis. It is hard to establish when money or any other social
objects were invented. It is also even more difficult to explain the nature of the
collective intentionality that motivates people to act in different ways when they
have contact with a concrete element constituted with a status. Indeed, Searle
considers status-functions as a unique abstraction whose function depends on

Coupling purposes with status-functions in artificial institutions

5

the individual interpretation of each individual, without worrying about how
these functions are represented and shared.
To address the mentioned issues, Ferraris [10,11] proposes to ground the social
reality on structures called Documentality. These structures of documents store
informations that not only describe or prescribe, but they actually build social
objects. Such a structure makes it possible to explain the staying and persistence
of functions (and his purposes) associated with status over time. The speech acts
that gave origin to functions and status were written and stored in documents
that run through time. These documents allow people to learn theses structures
through study, perception, etc. For example, the money exercise its functions in
the individual intentions only based in the memory (and consequently in the set
of functions) that the social objects recover of the individuals with the base on
the recording.
To summarize, social objects are used to externalize the set of recordings that
allow that individuals to remember the functionalities that a status (e.g., money)
makes available by being assigned to a social object (e.g., paper note). From
these theories, it is possible to conclude that an additional system of elements
is required so that functions and status can persist and have value recognized
over time within the social reality [10]. A similar system can be applied to MAS
to make explicit the functionalities of the status-functions that compose the
institutions. It will permit to improve the agents' reasoning about the satisfaction
of their goals and overcome the difficulties that motivate the realization of this
work.
2.2

Institutions in MAS

The main idea of using artificial institutions as a counterpart of human institutions in computer systems has inspired work in MAS. In different ways, these
works use the count-as relationship, established through the constitutive rules
proposed by Searle, to support the regulation of the system [5]. This work considers that the constitutive relation, as well as the related concepts (e.g., statusfunctions) provide functions to be exploited by the agents to achieve their goals
The purpose of this section is to review state of the art on artificial institutions
with respect of the explicit representation of the functions associated to the
institutional concepts.
Works on Artificial Institutions are usually inspired by the theory of John
Searle [31,30]. Some works present functional approaches, relating brute facts to
normative states (e.g., a given action counts as a violation of a norm). These
works do not address ontological issues, and, therefore, it becomes even more
difficult to support the meaning of abstract concepts present in the institutional
reality. Other works have ontological approaches, where brute facts are related
to concepts used in the specification of norms (e.g., sending a message counts
as a bid in an auction). However, these works have some limitations that are
discussed below.
Some approaches allow the agents to reason about the constitutive rules [9,13,6,7,35,1].
However, generally the status-function (Y ) is just a label assigned to the concrete

6

Cunha. Rafhael R, et al.

element (X ) and used in the specification of the regulative norms. Therefore, Y
does not seem to have any other purpose than to serve as a basis for the specification of stable regulative norms [34,1]. Some exceptions are (i) in the works
of [14,15,13,16] where Y represents a class formed with some properties as roles
responsible for executing actions, time to execute them, condition for execution,
etc.; (ii) in [34] where Y is a general concept, and X is a sub-concept that can
be used to explain Y. Although the exceptions contain more information than
just a label in the Y element, these data are somehow associated with regulative
norms. There are no models that make explicit what the constituted elements
(i.e., the status-functions) perform in the institution. Thus, the agents may not
understand that the actions performed can also satisfy their social objectives.
For example, the agent's goal have a book is a purpose of the payment statusfunction. Considering the previously described example of selling books, there is
currently no way for Bob and Tom to understand that the actions performed, if
interpreted through their purposes, can also satisfy their objectives. It occurs because there is not work that made explicit the purposes of the status-functions. If
the purposes of status-functions were made explicit, the status-functions' name
would be less relevant to the system's correct functioning. Also, new agents could
enter the system and understand the purposes of carrying out some functions
that have institutional interpretation and thus resolve themselves to satisfy their
objectives.
The limitation discussed above indicates the need to develop a model that explains the purposes of status-functions belonging to institutional reality. Aguilar
et al. [28] corroborate this conclusion by stating that institutions have not yet
considered how to help agents in decision-making, helping them to achieve their
own goals. The modeling of purposes of status-functions, described in the next
section, is a step to fill this open gap.

3

The purpose of status-functions

Inspired by the document structures suggested by Ferraris (cf. Section 2.1), this
section describes a model to specify the purposes associated with the statusfunctions in artificial institutions. The focus is on the main concepts and their
relations. The practical implementation of this model is beyond the scope of this
paper.
The model proposed in this work is composed of agents, institutions, and
purposes. Agents are autonomous entities that pursue their goals in the system [38]. Through MAS definition (cf. Section 1), we can see that goal is a
fundamental concept to understand and program MAS. The literature presents
several definitions of goal that are different but complementary to each other (see
more in [3,37,19,27,20,22]). In this work, goals are something that agents aim to
achieve (e.g. the holding of a certain state, the performance of an action, etc.).
Institutions provide the social interpretation of the environmental elements
of the system. The several models of artificial institutions are usually inspired by
the theory of Searle, considering that constitutive rules specify the assignment of

Coupling purposes with status-functions in artificial institutions

7

System

Change
Institution

Constitutive Rule

Status-Function

1..*

Function

Purpose

data

Goal

1..*

Goal

Agent

data

Fig. 1. Overview of the model.

status to those elements, enabling them to perform functions in a certain social
context. These statuses with their associated functions are then called statusfunctions. The assignment of status-functions to the environmental elements is
specified through constitutive rules. These rules are generally expressed as X
count-as Y in C where X represents an environmental element (i.e., a brute
fact), Y represents a status-function to be assigned to X, and C represents
the context under which the constitution takes place. It is beyond the scope of
this paper to propose a model of artificial institution. Rather, it considers this
general notion of institution as the entity that constitutes status-functions, that
is adopted by several models in the field of MAS.
While agents and institutions are known concepts, purposes are introduced
in the proposed model. The purposes are the practical interests of the agents that
can be satisfied by the functions associated with the status-functions (cf. Section 2.1). If a goal is something desirable by the agent and a purpose of a
status-function expresses practical interests of the agents, then we propose to
link them. In this work, it is assumed that agents have goals that are satisfied
by the purposes of the status-functions. In other words, a purpose is the social
interpretation of a function linked to a status aligned with the agent's social
goal. Therefore, the difference between a purpose and an agent goal is the social
characteristic (collective acceptance, etc.) that a purpose requires. Without this
social interpretation, a purpose and consequently a social goal aligned with that
purpose cannot be achieved. In addition, it is considered that the purposes are
detailed through a knowledge base. According to Borst [4], a knowledge base is
an adequate abstraction to represent a shared conceptualization within a context. Therefore, detailing through knowledge bases is essential for the model
to be flexible enough and represent the purpose of status-functions in different
contexts.
Shortly, we are stipulating a relationship between functions of status-functions
and purposes and between these purposes and goals of agents. Thus, if (i) an

8

Cunha. Rafhael R, et al.

agent has a goal that satisfies a purpose, (ii) this purpose is associated to a
status-function, and (iii) a constitutive rule specifies how a status-function is
constituted, then it is explicit how the agent should act to achieve its goal (i.e.,
acting to constitute the status-function that is associated to the same purpose as
the goal). In the previous example, Bob can know that he satisfies his social goal
consulting the purpose of payment status-function and subsequently consulting
the institutional specification to understand what concrete action is constituting
the payment status-function.

4

Evaluation

To illustrate the scenario of using institutions in multi-agent systems, consider an
open Multi-Agent System where the agents Bob, Alice, François, and João aim
to "have a book". Different programmers have developed the different agents'
specifications, that are slightly different from each other. The agent Bob has
the goal of have a book. Alice has the goal of get a book. François has the goal
of obtenir a book and João has the goal of ter a book. This example is used
in the next subsections to illustrate the limitations of not having an explicit
representation of the purposes of the status-functions. Subsection 4.1 describes
the disadvantages of not using the model from the perspective of the agents.
Subsection 4.2 shows how the model overcomes the disadvantages described in
the previous section. The subsection 4.3 describes the disadvantages of not using
the model from the institution's perspective. Finally, the subsection 4.4 discusses
the advantages that the model offers when used from an institutional perspective.
4.1

Limitations from the agents' perspective of not using the model
proposed in this work

In the section, we consider a scenario where all agents described in the introduction are located in a book store (Figure 2). This system is instrumented with
an institution that contains a constitutive rule stating that the concrete action
transfer count-as pay. Such a system could include other status-functions and
constitutive rules but, for simplicity, we focus only on this case to illustrate the
main features of the model proposed (cf. Section 3).
The first problem observed is the incompatibility of the specification of the
agents with the institutional vocabulary. For example, consider that Bob has a
plan to achieve his goal and this plan requires him to take a concrete action x
that is institutionally interpreted as pay. In this case, both specifications (Bob
and institution) are compatible because there is a constitutive rule stating that
a concrete action x counts as pay. By reading the book store's institutional specification, Bob discovers the action that fills his plan (i.e., that x is transfer in the
institution). However, the problem occurs when other agents have plans considering other words for pay (as afford, replay, and remit). Their specifications are
not compatible with that of the institution. This is because the status-function
is just a label. If the label specified in the agent's plans (e.g., afford, repay, and

Coupling purposes with status-functions in artificial institutions
Goal

have a book
pay satisfies have a book

action x count-as pay

Institutional specification

Goal

obtenir a
book

transfer count-as pay
action x count-as repay

Bob

François

get a book

action x count-as afford
Alice

9

ter a book

action x count-as remit
João

Fig. 2. Agents with the same objective operating in the same institution.

remit) is different from the label described in the institutional specification, the
agents cannot resolve themselves which are the proper action to perform. An
ad-hoc solution for this problem is to modify the agents' code so that they are
compatible with the institution. However, in a scenario where there are many
agents, this solution may be impractical.
Another problem observed is that the agents are unable to reason4 about
the satisfaction of their objectives. For example, the constitutive rule transfer
count-as pay does not make it explicit that the function of the status-function
pay can lead to a state of the world where the agents have achieved their goals.
Therefore, the agents cannot understand that the transfer action - institutionally interpreted as pay - takes them to a state of the world where they have
achieved their objectives. Institutions, as they are currently conceived, do not
provide instruments for agents to reason about actions based on their institutional meaning and, therefore, conclude that they satisfy their social objectives.
The solutions to solve this problem transfer the responsibility of checking if the
agent's social objective has been satisfied to the system. However, these solutions
decrease the agents' autonomy (they need to follow regulatory rules, perform actions that do not know the consequences, etc.).
4.2

Advantages from the agents' perspective of using the model
proposed in this work

To illustrate how the proposed model solves the limitations from the agents'
perspective, consider again the example involving Bob, Alice, François, and João
and the common social goal of having a book (Figure 3). However, the purposes
related to the status-function pay are now explicit.
First, the agent's specification and institutional vocabulary become compatible. This is due to the agents' plans being specified considering the purposes
4

Reasoning about the satisfaction of their social goals in the context of this work
means that agents consult the purposes (i.e., the consequences of executing a concrete action that has an institutional interpretation) in order to realize that these
consequences are analogous to their objectives.

10

Cunha. Rafhael R, et al.

related to the status-functions instead of the nomenclature used in the specifications. For example, in the subsection 4.1, Alice's plan requires her to perform
an action that counts as pay. This could bring some incompatibilities as already
discussed. The existence of purposes related to status-functions allows Alice to
perform an action that has the purpose of getting a book. The main difference
with this proposal is that the institutional nomenclature of status-functions (i.e.,
pay) is irrelevant as long as the agent has access to the status-function's purposes. In other words, the agent's plan will not look to the status but to the
purposes associated with it. Agents can act in the institution according their
purposes without requiring changes in their code.

Institutional purpose specification
Extends

Goal

have a book

pay hasPurpose of have a book
pay hasPurpose of get a book
pay hasPurpose of obtenir a book
pay hasPurpose of ter a book

Institutional specification

Goal

obtenir a
book

transfer count-as pay
action x satisfies have a book

action x satisfies obtenir a book

Bob

François

get a book

action x satisfies get a book
Alice

ter a book

action x satisfies ter a book
João

Fig. 3. Use of the proposed model in an institutional specification.

Another advantage is the improvement in the agents reasoning about the
satisfaction of their goals. By adding purposes related to status-functions, agents
can reason about the purposes (i.e., the consequences) of carrying out actions
constituting status-functions. From this, the agents can check which actions are
aligned to their social goals and, if performed, these actions can satisfy them. For
example, the status-functions pay has some associated purposes, among them,
that of having a book. If Bob looks for this own social goal of having a book
in the purposes, he can infer that, the status-function pay is of his interest
and, moreover, that the concrete action of transfer is counting as pay in this
institution. The very x action for his plan in this institution is thus transfer.
This solution allows the agent himself to check if his social objective can be
satisfied. This solution seems to be appropriate because it prevents the agent
from following unnecessary regulative rules or performing actions he does not
know the consequences.

Coupling purposes with status-functions in artificial institutions

4.3

11

Limitations from the institution' perspective of not using the
model proposed in this work

Consider that Bob, Alice, François and João still have the same social goals but
can move through four different institutions. They are (i) a book store, (ii) a
library, (iii) a bookshelf at a friend's house, and (iv) a hostel shelf (Figure 4). The
first institution contains a constitutive rule stating that the action transfer countas pay, rent, donation and replace. The second institution contains a constitutive
rule stating that signing a loan count-as pay, rent, donation and replace. The
third institution contains a constitutive rule stating that receiving the book from
a friend count-as pay, rent, donation and replace. Finally, the fourth institution
contains a constitutive rule stating that putting a book on a shelf count-as pay,
rent, donation and replace. All these scenarios are part of a similar context. That
is, it involves obtaining books.
book store
institutional specification

transfer count-as pay
transfer count-as rent
transfer count-as donation
transfer count-as replace

Goal

Goal

have a book

action x count-as pay
Bob

sign loan count-as pay
sign loan count-as rent
sign loan count-as donation
sign loan count-as replace

action x count-as donation
François

friend ́s house
institutional specification

get a book

action x count-as rent
Alice

obtenir a
book

library
institutional specification

receive a book count-as pay
receive a book count-as rent
receive a book count-as donation
receive a book count-as replace
hostel
institutional specification

ter a book

action x count-as replace
João

put book on shelf count-as pay
put book on shelf count-as rent
put book on shelf count-as donation
put book on shelf count-as replace

Fig. 4. The institution prepared for different agents.

The problem from an institutional perspective is that institutions have to be
specified for every possible incoming agent. In the example, they have to have
four constitutive rules, one for each agent. For every new different agent, a new
constitutive rule have to be added in each institution. The institutional specification is thus quite dependent of how agents are programmed. The institutional
developer has to be worried about the agents' internals instead of specifying a
good institution (independent of the incoming agents).
In fact, there are some solutions to work around this problem. The first
one is to change the institution's specification by adding new constitutive rules.
However, it cannot be guaranteed that the new constitutive rule makes sense in
that system or institution (which sometimes makes this solution unfeasible). A

12

Cunha. Rafhael R, et al.

second possible solution is to change the agent's code. However, as already mentioned in 4.1 subsection, this solution becomes impractical if many agents are
operating on the system. Furthermore, if a new system is available for agents or
new agents to join different systems, new changes need to happen. As it is currently conceived, the institution is not open enough to support the performance
of different agents designed with different (but similar) plans and objectives.

4.4

Advantages from the institution' perspective of using the model
proposed in this work

To illustrate the proposed model this model's use from the institution perspective, consider again the example involving Bob, Alice, François, and João still
have the same goals but can move through four institutions containing four different institutional specification (Figure 5). In addition, there are purposes related
to the status-functions. Each institution contains its own institutional specification that is extended by adding purposes related to the status-functions. These
purposes represent the interests of agents possibly operating in the institution.

pay hasPurpose of have a book
pay hasPurpose of get a book
pay hasPurpose of obtenir a book
pay hasPurpose of ter a book

rent hasPurpose of have a book
rent hasPurpose of get a book
rent hasPurpose of obtenir a book
rent hasPurpose of ter a book

Extends

Extends
book store
institutional specification
Goal

have a book

action x satisfies have a book

donation hasPurpose of have a book
donation hasPurpose of get a book
donation hasPurpose of obtenir a book
donation hasPurpose of ter a book

replace hasPurpose of have a book
replace hasPurpose of get a book
replace hasPurpose of obtenir a book
replace hasPurpose of ter a book

Extends

Extends
Goal

obtenir a
book

transfer count-as pay
library
institutional specification

action x satisfies obtenir a book

sign loan count-as rent
François

Bob

get a book

receive a book count-as donation
action x satisfies get a book
Alice

ter a book

friend ́s house
institutional specification

hostel
institutional specification

action x satisfies ter a book
João

put book on shelf count-as
replace

Fig. 5. Use of the proposed model in some institutional specifications.

We can notice that the institutional specification, in particular the constitutive rules, is not conceived for the different possible incoming agent. The link between the status-functions and agents' goals is done in a new document properly
conceived for that. If a new agent is considered to be participant of the institution, only this document has to be adapted. The constitution is kept unchanged.
For example, the book store specification contains an associated document that
describe the purposes of the pay status-function. In this case, pay is related to
the social goals (i.e., has the purposes) of Bob, Alice, François and João.

Coupling purposes with status-functions in artificial institutions

5

13

Results and discussions

The problem motivating this paper is the impossibility of the agents to reason about the functions associated with status-functions representing the institutional interpretation of certain facts that occur in the environment. This
problem is partially solved by computational models that implement artificial
institutions. However, these models do not represent the purpose of this interpretation from an agent perspective. Agents have to be hard-coded to know
which status-functions can be useful for them to achieve their social goals and
institutions must be recoded to receive new agents specified by different parties.
Considering this problem, we propose a model to express the purposes associated
with the status-functions that compose the artificial institutions. The conception of our model is an adaptation, from a particular point of view, of Searle's
and Ferraris's theories [31,30,11,10] which claims that the purposes are specified
by practical interests of the individuals that can be satisfied by the functions
associated to the status-functions (cf. Section 2.1). We assume that the purposes
are defined based on the interests of the agents. However, they are specified by
a party involved in the development of the system. In other words, it is not the
agents themselves who define the purposes based on collective agreements, etc.
There are some advantages of such conception that we discuss below. The
first one is related to the flexibility of the agents, that can achieve their social
goals even being developed by different programmers For example, the subsection 4.1 illustrates a scenario where all agents are located in the same institution
(e.g., book store). In this example, specified agents with vocabularies other than
the institutional vocabulary may have difficulties to (i) execute their plans and
(ii) understand when their social goals are reached. The solution to this problem
is described in subsection 4.2 where the agents' plans can be specified considering
the purposes related to the status-functions rather than the status nomenclature. The advantages are (a) the agents can reason about these functions and
adapt in different scenarios to satisfy their plans and (b) by reasoning about the
functions of the status-functions, the agent can perceive that these functions are
similar to their interests and therefore they can help the agents to reach their
social goals. The agent's capability to reason about the functions and adapt to
different scenarios is an important advance in open systems' flexibility [2,39].
The agent's understanding of what makes his social objective satisfied is also
an important advance in his autonomy [28]. In this case, the agent can reason
about the actions in the plans and the regulative rules that govern the system. In
both cases, the agent has greater autonomy and flexibility in deciding whether
a particular action will help him reach his social goal.
The second advantage is related to the institution's flexibility in being prepared to receive different agents designed by different developers. For example,
the subsection 4.3 illustrates a scenario where all agents can enter and leave
different institutions. In this example, institutions are not prepared to receive
different agents. Then, the developer needs to modify the institutional specifications. However, in open systems, it is not possible to predict which agents will
enter or leave the institution [17,25]. The solution to the problem is described in

14

Cunha. Rafhael R, et al.

subsection 4.4: an the explicit link between status-functions and purposes that
allows us to prepare the institution for new agents.
The advantages can also be seen in the concepts of cohesion and coupling
present in software engineering. The cohesion of a module corresponds to the
degree to which the module is dedicated to implementing only one responsibility
of the system [24]. Cohesive modules are those that have few responsibilities. This
way, maintenance is simpler and avoids side effects. It is easier to change one part
of the application without affecting other parts. The coupling means how much
a module depends on the other module to work [26]. When there is low coupling,
the application becomes more flexible, reusable and more organized. Therefore,
the ideal for a system to be flexible and understandable are modules with high
cohesion and low coupling [26]. The proposed model has both properties. High
cohesion occurs because the model proposes to extend only the status-functions
present in the institutional reality through the introduction of the concept of
purposes related to these functions. The low coupling is guaranteed because the
model does not depend on the other system modules (environment, institution,
agents, etc.) to function correctly. This separation of responsibilities also ensures
that the model is flexible and requires less effort to perform maintenance.
According to [12], human societies usually have a representation (i) internal
of the social reality, i.e., the individuals do not necessarily reason in terms of
status-functions, norms, purposes, etc and (ii) implicit, as it is built on top of
people's mental states (that believe, for instance, that a certain man is the king).
In the proposed model, purposes compose a system (i) explicit, as it is properly
specified through institutional concepts and (ii) external, as it is persisted outside the agents mind. Such conception is in agreement with some authors that
point that institutions can (or perhaps even should) be used for purposes that
are beyond the normative ones [28,13,32,33,21,23]. In summary, our work proposes an interface to make different couplings in different institutions without
changing the institutional specification or the coding of the agents. In other
words, agents and institutions remain unchanged because the purpose is the
link between agents' interests and the institutions. From this, the change from
one scenario to another occurs only in the mapping between the institutional
specification and the purposes that reflect the agents' interests.
As future work, we plan to explore additional theoretical aspects related to
the model, such as (i) investigations about how other proposed institutional
abstractions fit on the model, (ii) the verification of the consistency among
status-functions' purposes and agents' social goals, and (iii) check if the functions related to status must be further detailed. We plan to also address more
practical points such as (i) the modeling of a status-functions' purposes based
on a real scenario, (ii) the implementation of this model in a computer system
and (iii) the integration this model in an computational model that implements
the constitution of status-functions and after in an MAS platform.

Coupling purposes with status-functions in artificial institutions

15

References
1. Aldewereld, H., Álvarez-Napagao, S., Dignum, F., Vázquez-Salceda, J.: Making norms concrete. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems: volume 1-Volume 1. pp. 807–814. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (2010)
2. Aldewereld, H., Dignum, V.: Operetta: Organization-oriented development environment. In: International Workshop on Languages, Methodologies and Development Tools for Multi-Agent Systems. pp. 1–18. Springer (2010)
3. Boissier, O., Bordini, R.H., Hubner, J., Ricci, A.: Multi-agent oriented programming: programming multi-agent systems using JaCaMo. MIT Press (2020)
4. Borst, W.N.: Construction of engineering ontologies for knowledge sharing and
reuse. (1999)
5. Brito, M.D.E., Thévin, L., Garbay, C., Boissier, O., Hübner, J.F.: Supporting flexible regulation of crisis management by means of situated artificial institution 17(4),
309–324 (2016)
6. Brito, M.d., et al.: A model of institucional reality supporting the regulation in
artificial institutions. Ph.D. thesis, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (2016)
7. Cardoso, H.L., Oliveira, E.: Institutional Reality and Norms: Specifying and Monitoring Agent Organizations. International Journal of Cooperative Information Systems 16(01), 67–95 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1142/s0218843007001573
8. Cliffe, O., De Vos, M., Padget, J.: Answer set programming for representing and
reasoning about virtual institutions. In: International Workshop on Computational
Logic in Multi-Agent Systems. pp. 60–79. Springer (2006)
9. Cliffe, O., De Vos, M., Padget, J.: Specifying and reasoning about multiple institutions. In: International Workshop on Coordination, Organizations, Institutions,
and Norms in Agent Systems. pp. 67–85. Springer (2006)
10. Condello, A.: Two questions on the ontology of money. Ardeth (03), 181–191 (2018)
11. Condello, A., Ferraris, M., Searle, J.R.: Money, Social Ontology and Law. Routledge (2019)
12. De Brito, M., Hüubner, J.F.: A Conceptual Model for Situated Artificial Institutions. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 8624 LNAI(March
2016) (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09764-0
13. Fornara, N.: Specifying and monitoring obligations in open multiagent systems
using semantic web technology. In: Semantic agent systems, pp. 25–45. Springer
(2011)
14. Fornara, N., Colombetti, M.: Ontology and time evolution of obligations and prohibitions using semantic web technology. In: International Workshop on Declarative
Agent Languages and Technologies. pp. 101–118. Springer (2009)
15. Fornara, N., Colombetti, M.: Representation and monitoring of commitments and
norms using owl. AI communications 23(4), 341–356 (2010)
16. Fornara, N., Tampitsikas, C.: Using owl artificial institutions for dynamically creating open spaces of interaction. In: AT. pp. 281–295 (2012)
17. Fornara, N., Viganò, F., Colombetti, M.: Agent communication and institutional
reality. In: International Workshop on Agent Communication. pp. 1–17. Springer
(2004)
18. Fornara, N., Viganò, F., Colombetti, M.: Agent communication and artificial institutions. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 14(2), 121–142 (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10458-006-0017-8

16

Cunha. Rafhael R, et al.

19. Hindriks, K.V., De Boer, F.S., Van Der Hoek, W., Meyer, J.J.C.: Agent programming with declarative goals. In: International Workshop on Agent Theories, Architectures, and Languages. pp. 228–243. Springer (2000)
20. Hübner, J.F., Bordini, R.H., Wooldridge, M.: Declarative goal patterns for agentspeak. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS'06) (2006)
21. Murray-Rust, D., Papapanagiotou, P., Robertson, D.: Softening electronic institutions to support natural interaction. Human Computation 2(2) (2015).
https://doi.org/10.15346/hc.v2i2.3
22. Nigam, V., Leite, J.: A dynamic logic programming based system for agents with
declarative goals. In: International Workshop on Declarative Agent Languages and
Technologies. pp. 174–190. Springer (2006)
23. Padget, J., De Vos, M., Page, C.A.: Deontic sensors. IJCAI International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2018-July(section 5), 475–481 (2018)
24. Pfleeger, S.L., Atlee, J.M.: Software engineering: theory and practice. Pearson Education India (2010)
25. Piunti, M.: Situating agents and organisations in artifact-based work environment.
Ph.D. thesis, Univerist di Bologna (2009)
26. Pressman, R.S.: Software engineering: a practitioner's approach. Palgrave macmillan (2005)
27. van Riemsdijk, B., van der Hoek, W., Meyer, J.J.C.: Agent programming in dribble:
from beliefs to goals using plans. In: Proceedings of the second international joint
conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems. pp. 393–400 (2003)
28. Rodriguez-Aguilar, J.A., Sierra, C., Arcos, J.L., Lopez-Sanchez, M., Rodriguez,
I.: Towards next generation coordination infrastructures. Knowledge Engineering
Review 30(4), 435–453 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269888915000090
29. Rodriguez-Aguilar, J.A., Sierra, C., Arcos, J.L., López Sánchez, M., Rodrı́guez Santiago, I.: Towards next generation coordination infrastructures. Knowledge Engineering Review, 2015, vol. 30, num. 4, p. 1-19 (2015)
30. Searle, J.: Making the social world: The structure of human civilization. Oxford
University Press (2010)
31. Searle, J.R.: The construction of social reality. Simon and Schuster (1995)
32. Telang, P.R., Singh, M.P., Yorke-Smith, N.: A coupled operational semantics for
goals and commitments. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 65, 31–85 (2019)
33. Tomic, S., Pecora, F., Saffiotti, A.: Norms, Institutions, and Robots 14(8), 1–14
(2018), http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.11456
34. Vázquez-Salceda, J., Aldewereld, H., Grossi, D., Dignum, F.: From human regulations to regulated software agents' behavior. Artificial Intelligence and Law 16(1),
73–87 (2008)
35. Viganò, F., Colombetti, M.: Model Checking Norms and Sanctions in Institutions
(ii), 316–329 (2008)
36. Winikoff, M.: Challenges and directions for engineering multi-agent systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1209.1428 (2012)
37. Winikoff, M., Padgham, L., Harland, J., Thangarajah, J.: Declarative and procedural goals in intelligent agent systems. In: International Conference on Principles
of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. Morgan Kaufman (2002)
38. Wooldridge, M.: An introduction to multiagent systems. John Wiley & Sons (2009)
39. Zambonelli, F., Jennings, N.R., Wooldridge, M.: Organisational abstractions for
the analysis and design of multi-agent systems. In: International Workshop on
Agent-Oriented Software Engineering. pp. 235–251. Springer (2000)

