IFIC/07-03

Probing non-standard neutrino interactions with supernova neutrinos
A. Esteban-Pretel, R. Tomàs and J. W. F. Valle1
1

AHEP Group, Institut de Fı́sica Corpuscular - C.S.I.C/Universitat de València
Edifici Instituts d'Investigació, Apt. 22085, E-46071 València, Spain
(Dated: December 28, 2013)

We analyze the possibility of probing non-standard neutrino interactions (NSI, for short) through
the detection of neutrinos produced in a future galactic supernova (SN). We consider the effect of
NSI on the neutrino propagation through the SN envelope within a three-neutrino framework, paying

arXiv:0704.0032v1 [hep-ph] 2 Apr 2007

special attention to the inclusion of NSI-induced resonant conversions, which may take place in the
most deleptonised inner layers. We study the possibility of detecting NSI effects in a Megaton water
Cherenkov detector, either through modulation effects in the ν̄e spectrum due to (i) the passage
of shock waves through the SN envelope, (ii) the time dependence of the electron fraction and (iii)
the Earth matter effects; or, finally, through the possible detectability of the neutronization νe
burst. We find that the ν̄e spectrum can exhibit dramatic features due to the internal NSI-induced
resonant conversion. This occurs for non-universal NSI strengths of a few %, and for very small
flavor-changing NSI above a few×10−5 .
PACS numbers: 13.15.+g, 14.60.Lm, 14.60.Pq, 14.60.St, 97.60.Bw

I.

INTRODUCTION

tions may arise from renormalization and/or threshold
effects [21].

The very first data of the KamLAND collaboration [1]
have been enough to isolate neutrino oscillations as the
correct mechanism explaining the solar neutrino problem [2, 3], indicating also that large mixing angle (LMA)
was the right solution. The 766.3 ton-yr KamLAND data
sample further strengthens the validity of the LMA oscillation interpretation of the data [4].

We stress that non-standard interactions strengths are
highly model-dependent. In some models NSI strengths
are too small to be relevant for neutrino propagation,
because they are either suppressed by some large mass
scale or restricted by limits on neutrino masses, or both.
However, this need not be the case, and there are many
theoretically attractive scenarios where moderately large

Current data imply that neutrino have mass. For an
updated review of the current status of neutrino oscillations see [5]. Theories of neutrino mass [6, 7] typically require that neutrinos have non-standard properties such as neutrino electromagnetic transition moments [8, 9, 10] or non-standard four-Fermi interactions

NSI strengths are possible and consistent with the smallness of neutrino masses. In fact one can show that
NSI may exist even in the limit of massless neutrinos [14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Such may also occur in the
context of fully unified models like SO(10) [22].

(NSI, for short) [11, 12, 13]. The expected magnitude of
the NSI effects is rather model-dependent.

nation of the oscillation parameters, it is necessary to
test for sub-leading non-oscillation effects that could arise
from non-standard neutrino interactions. These are natural outcome of many neutrino mass models and can be of
two types: flavor-changing (FC) and non-universal (NU).
These are constrained by existing experiments (see below) and, with neutrino experiments now entering a precision phase [23], an improved determination of neutrino

Seesaw-type models lead to a non-trivial structure of
the lepton mixing matrix characterizing the charged and
neutral current weak interactions [6]. The NSI which
are induced by the charged and neutral current gauge
interactions may be sizeable [14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Alternatively, non-standard neutrino interactions may arise in
models where neutrinos masses are radiatively "calculable" [19, 20]. Finally, in some supersymmetric unified
models, the strength of non-standard neutrino interac-

We argue that, in addition to the precision determi-

parameters and their theoretical impact constitute an important goal in astroparticle and high energy physics [5].
Here we concentrate on the impact of non-standard

2
neutrino interactions on supernova physics. We show
how complementary information on the NSI parameters could be inferred from the detection of core-collapse
supernova neutrinos. The motivation for the study is
twofold. First, if a future SN event takes place in our

10−2 , |εfeeP | . 10−1 − 1, |εfμτP | . 0.05, |εfeτP | . 0.5 at
90 % C.L [30, 31, 32]. On the other hand the analysis
of the e+ e− → ν ν̄γ cross section measured at LEP II
leads to a bound on |εeP
τ τ | . 0.5 [33]. Future prospects
to improve the current limits imply the measurement of

Galaxy the number of neutrino events expected in the
current or planned neutrino detectors would be enormous, O(104 − 105 ) [24]. Moreover, the extreme conditions under which neutrinos have to travel since they
are created in the SN core, in strongly deleptonised regions at nuclear densities, until they reach the Earth,
lead to strong matter effects. In particular the effect of
small values of the NSI parameters can be dramatically

sin2 θW leptonically in the scattering off electrons in the
target, as well as in neutrino deep inelastic scattering in
a future neutrino factory. The main improvement would
be in the case of |εfeeP | and |εfeτP |, where values as small
as 10−3 and 0.02, respectively, could be reached [31].

enhanced, possibly leading to observable consequences.
This paper is planned as follows. In Sec. II we summarize the current observational bounds on the parameters
describing the NSI, including previous works on NSI in
SNe. In Sec. III we describe the neutrino propagation
formalism as well as the SN profiles which will be used.
In Sec. IV we analyze the effect of NSI on the ν propagation in the inner regions near the neutrinosphere and in
the outer regions of the SN envelope. In Sec. V we discuss
the possibility of using various observables to probe the
presence of NSI in the neutrino signal of a future galactic
SN. Finally in Sec. VI we present our conclusions.

II.

The search for flavor violating processes involving
charged leptons is expected to restrict corresponding neutrino interactions, to the extent that the SU (2) gauge
symmetry is assumed. However, this can at most give
indicative order-of-magnitude restrictions, since we know
SU (2) is not a good symmetry of nature. Using radiative
corrections it has been argued that, for example, μ − e
conversion on nuclei like in the case of μ− T i also con−4
strains |εqP
[31].
μe | . 7.7 × 10
Non-standard interactions can also affect neutrino
propagation through matter, probed in current neutrino
oscillation experiments. The bounds so obtained apply to
V
L
R
the vector coupling constant of the NSI, εfαβ
= εfαβ
+εfαβ
,
since only this appears in neutrino propagation in matter [91].

PRELIMINARIES

B.

A large class of non-standard interactions may be
parametrized with the effective low-energy four-fermion
operator:
√
P
LN SI = −εfαβ
2 2GF (ν̄α γμ Lνβ )(f ̄γ μ P f ) ,

(1)

where P = L, R and f is a first generation fermion:
P
e, u, d. The coefficients εfαβ
denote the strength of the
NSI between the neutrinos of flavors α and β and the
P −handed component of the fermion f .

P
Current constraints on εfαβ
come from a variety of different sources, which we now briefly list.

The role of neutrino NSIs as subleading effects on the
solar neutrino oscillations and KamLAND has been recently considered in Ref. [34, 35, 36] with the following
bounds at 90 % CL for ε ≡ − sin θ23 εdV
eτ with the al-

lowed range −0.93 . ε . 0.30, while for the diagonal
dV
term ε′ ≡ sin2 θ23 εdV
τ τ − εee , the only forbidden region is
[0.20, 0.78] [36]. Only in the ideal case of infinitely precise solar neutrino oscillation parameters determination,
the allowed range would "close from the left" for negative
NSI parameter values, at −0.6 for ε and −0.7 for ε′ .
C.

A.

Solar and reactor

Atmospheric and accelerator neutrinos

Laboratory

Neutrino scattering experiments [25, 26, 27, 28,
29] provide the following bounds, |εfμμP | . 10−3 −

Non-standard interactions involving muon neutrinos
can be constrained by atmospheric neutrino experiments
as well as accelerator neutrino oscillation searches at

3
K2K and MINOS. In Ref. [37] Super-Kamiokande and
MACRO observations of atmospheric neutrinos were considered in the framework of two neutrinos. The limits obdV
dV
tained were −0.05 . εdV
μτ < 0.04 and |ετ τ − εμμ | . 0.17
at 99 % CL. The same data set together with K2K were

Ref. [42, 43]. The main effect found was a reduction in
the core electron fraction Ye during core collapse. A lower
Ye would lead to a lower homologous core mass, a lower
shock energy, and a greater nuclear photon-disintegration
burden for the shock wave. By allowing a maximum

recently considered in Refs. [38, 39] to study the nonstandard neutrino interactions in a three generation scheme
under the assumption εeμ = εμμ = εμτ = 0. The allowed region of ετ τ obtained for values of εeτ smaller
V
than O(10−1 ) becomes Σf =u,d,e εfαβ
Nf /Ne . 0.2 [39] ,
where Nf stands for the fermion number density.

∆Ye = −0.02 it has been claimed that εeα . 10−3 , where
α = μ, τ [43].

D.

Cosmology

If non-standard interactions with electrons were large
they might also lead to important cosmological and astrophysical implications. For instance, neutrinos could
be kept in thermal contact with electrons and positrons
longer than in the standard case, hence they would share
a larger fraction of the entropy release from e± annihilations. This would affect the predicted features of the
cosmic background of neutrinos. As recently pointed out
in Ref [40] required couplings are, though, larger than
the current laboratory bounds.

E.

NSI in Supernovae

On the other hand it has been noted since long ago
that the existence of NSI plays an important role in the
propagation of SN neutrinos through the envelope leading to the possibility of a new resonant conversion. In
contrast to the well known MSW effect [44, 45] it would
take place even for massless neutrinos [13]. Two basic
ingredients are necessary: universal and flavor changing
NSI. In the original scheme neutrinos were mixed in the
leptonic charged current and universality was violated
thanks to the effect of mixing with heavy gauge singlet
leptons [6, 14]. Such resonance would induce strong neutrino flavor conversion both for neutrinos and antineutrinos simultaneously, possibly affecting the neutrino signal of the SN1987A as well as the possibility of having
r−process nucleosynthesis. This was first quantitatively
considered within a two-flavor νe −ντ scheme, and bounds
on the relevant NSI parameters were obtained using both
arguments [46].
One of the main features of the such "internal" or
"massless" resonant conversion mechanism is that it requires the violation of universality, its position being

According to the currently accepted supernova (SN)
paradigm, neutrinos are expected to play a crucial role
in SN dynamics. As a result, SN physics provides
a laboratory to probe neutrino properties. Moreover,
many future large neutrino detectors are currently being discussed [41]. The enormous number of events,
O(104 − 105 ) that would be "seen" in these detectors indicates that a future SN in our Galaxy would provide a
very sensitive probe of non-standard neutrino interaction

determined only by the matter chemical composition,
namely the value of the electron fraction Ye , and not by
the density. In view of the experimental upper bounds
on the NSI parameters such new resonance can only take
place in the inner layers of the supernova, near the neutrinosphere, where Ye takes its minimum values. In this
region the values of Ye are small enough to allow for
resonance conversions to take place in agreement with
existing bounds on the strengths of non-universal NSI

effects.

parameters.

The presence of NSI can lead to important consequences for the SN neutrino physics both in the highly
dense core as well as in the envelope where neutrinos
basically freely stream.

The SN physics implications of another type of NSI
present in supersymmetric R-parity violating models

The role of non-forward neutrino scattering processes
on heavy nuclei and free nucleons giving rise to flavor
change within the SN core has been recently analyzed in

have also been studied in Ref. [47], again for a system
of two neutrinos. For definiteness NSI on d−quarks were
considered, in two cases: (i) massless neutrinos without
mixing in the presence of flavor-changing (FC) and nonuniversal (NU) NSIs, and (ii) neutrinos with eV masses

4
and FC NSI. Different arguments have been used in
order to constrain the parameters describing the NSI,
namely, the SN1987A signal, the possibility to get successful r−process nucleosynthesis, and the possible enhancement of the energy deposition behind the shock
wave to reactivate it.
On the other hand several subsequent articles [48, 49,
50] considered the effects of NSI on the neutrino propagation in a three–neutrino mixing scenario for the case
Ye > 0.4, typical for the outer SN envelope. Together
−2
with the assumption that εdV
this prevents the
αβ . 10
appearance of internal resonances in contrast to previous
references.

Motivated by supersymmetric theories without R parity, in Ref. [48] the authors considered the effects of
small-strength NSI with d−quarks. Following the formalism developed in Refs. [51, 52] they studied the corrections that such NSI would have on the expressions
for the survival probabilities in the standard resonances
MSW-H and MSW-L. A similar analysis was performed
in Ref. [49] assuming Z-induced NSI interactions originated by additional heavy neutrinos. A phenomenological generalization of these results was carried out in
Ref. [50]. The authors found an analytical compact expression for the survival probabilities in which the main
effects of the NSI can be embedded through shifts of the
mixing angles θ12 and θ13 . In contrast to similar expressions found previously these directly apply to all mixing
angles, and in the case with Earth matter effects. The
main phenomenological consequence was the identification of a degeneracy between θ13 and εeα , similar to the
analogous "confusion" between θ13 and the corresponding NSI parameter noted to exist in the context of longbaseline neutrino oscillations [53, 54].
We have now re-considered the general three–neutrino
mixing scenario with NSI. In contrast to previous
work [48, 49, 50], we have not restricted ourselves to
large values of Ye , discussing also small values present
in the inner layers. This way our generalized description includes both the possibility of neutrinos having the
"massless" NSI-induced resonant conversions in the inner layers of the SN envelope [13, 46, 47], as well as the
"outer" oscillation-induced conversions [48, 49, 50] [92].

III.

NEUTRINO EVOLUTION

In this section we describe the main ingredients of our
analysis. Our emphasis will be on the use of astrophysically realistic SN matter and Ye profiles, characterizing
its density and the matter composition. Their details,
in particular their time dependence, are crucial in determining the way the non-standard neutrino interactions
affect the propagation of neutrinos in the SN medium.

A.

Evolution Equation

As discussed in Sec. II in an unpolarized medium the
neutrino propagation in matter will be affected by the
V
L
R
vector coupling constant of the NSI, εfαβ
= εfαβ
+εfαβ
[93].
The way the neutral current NSI modifies the neutrino evolution will be parametrized phenomenologically
through the effective low-energy four-fermion operator
described in Eq. (1). We also assume εfαβ ∈ R, neglecting possible CP violation in the new interactions.
Under these assumptions the Hamiltonian describing
the SN neutrino evolution in the presence of NSI can be
cast in the following form [94]
i

d
να = (Hkin + Hint )αβ νβ ,
dr

(2)

where Hkin stands for the kinetic term
Hkin = U

M2 †
U ,
2E

(3)

with M 2 = diag(m21 , m22 , m23 ), and U the three-neutrino
lepton mixing matrix [6] in the PDG convention [55] and
with no CP phases.
The second term of the Hamiltonian accounts for the
interaction of neutrinos with matter and can be split into
two pieces,
std
nsi
Hint = Hint
+ Hint
.

(4)

std
The first term, Hint
describes the standard interaction
std
with matter and can be written as Hint
= diag (VCC , 0, 0)
up to one loop corrections due to different masses of the
muon and tau leptons [56]. The standard matter poten-

tial for neutrinos is given by
VCC =

√

2GF Ne = V0 ρYe ,

(5)

5
3

where V0 ≈ 7.6 × 10−14 eV, the density is given in g/cm ,
and Ye stands for the relative number of electrons with
respect to baryons. For antineutrinos the potential is
identical but with the sign changed.
The term in the Hamiltonian describing the non-

are found in stellar evolution simulations [57]. In the intermediate regions, where the MSW H and L-resonances
take place Ye ≈ 0.5. This value can further increase in
the most outer layers of the SN envelope due to the presence of hydrogen.

standard neutrino interactions with a fermion f can be
expressed as,
X
f
nsi
(Hint
)αβ =
(Vnsi
)αβ ,
(6)

After the SN core bounce the matter profile is affected
in several ways. First note that a front shock wave starts
to propagate outwards and eventually ejects the SN envelope. The evolution of the shock wave will strongly modify the density profile and therefore the neutrino propa-

f =e,u,d

√
f
with (Vnsi
)αβ ≡ 2GF Nf εfαβ . For definiteness and motivated by actual models, for example, those with broken
R parity supersymmetry we take for f the down-type
quark. However, an analogous treatment would apply
to the case of NSI on up-type quarks, the existence of
NSI with electrons brings no drastic qualitative differences with respect to the pure oscillation case (see below). Therefore the NSI potential can be expressed as
follows,
d
(Vnsi
)αβ = εdαβ V0 ρ(2 − Ye ) .

(7)

From now on we will not explicitely write the superindex
d. In order to further simplify the problem we will redefine the diagonal NSI parameters so that εμμ = 0, as one
can easily see that subtracting a matrix proportional to
the identity leaves the physics involved in the neutrino
oscillation unaffected.

B.

Supernova matter profiles

Neutrino propagation depends on the supernova matter and chemical profile through the effective potential.
This profile exhibits an important time dependence during the explosion. Fig. 1 shows the density ρ(t, r) and the
electron fraction Ye (t, r) profiles for the SN progenitor as
well as at different times post-bounce.
Progenitor density profiles can be roughly
parametrized by a power-law function
 n
R0
,
(8)
ρ(r) = ρ0
r
where ρ0 ∼ 104 g/cm3 , R0 ∼ 109 cm, and n ∼ 3. The
electron fraction profile varies depending on the matter
composition of the different layers. For instance, typical
values of Ye between 0.42 and 0.45 in the inner regions

gation [58, 59]. Following Ref. [60] we shall assume that
the structure of the shock wave is more complicated and
an additional "reverse wave" appears due to the collision
of the neutrino-driven wind and the slowly moving material behind the forward shock, as seen in the upper panel
of Fig. 1 [95].
On the other hand, the electron fraction is also affected
by the time evolution as the SN explosion proceeds. Once
the collapse starts the core density grows so that the neutrinos become eventually effectively trapped within the
so called "neutrinosphere". At this point the trapped
electron fraction has decreased until values of the order of
0.33 [61]. When the inner core reaches the nuclear density
it can not contract any further and bounces. As a consequence a shock wave forms in the inner core and starts
propagating outwards. When the newly formed supernova shock reaches densities low enough for the initially
trapped neutrinos to begin streaming faster than the
shock propagates [62], a breakout pulse of νe is launched.
In the shock-heated matter, which is still rich of electrons and completely disintegrated into free neutrons and
protons, a large number of νe are rapidly produced by
electron captures on protons. They follow the shock on
its way out until they are released in a very luminous
flash, the breakout burst, at about the moment when
the shock penetrates the neutrinosphere and the neutrinos can escape essentially unhindered. As a consequence,
the lepton number in the layer around the neutrinosphere
decreases strongly and the matter neutronizes [63]. The
value of Ye steadily decreases in these layers until values of the order of O(10−2 ). Outside the neutrinosphere
there is a steep rise until Ye ≈ 0.5. This is a robust
feature of the neutrino-driven baryonic wind. Neutrino
heating drives the wind mass loss and causes Ye to rise
within a few 10 km from low to high values, between 0.45

6
and 0.55 [64], see bottom panel of Fig. 1. Inspired in the
numerical results of Ref. [60] we have parametrized the
behavior of the electron fraction near the neutrinosphere
phenomenologically as,
Ye = a + b arctan[(r − r0 )/rs ] ,

(9)

where a ≈ 0.23 − 0.26 and b ≈ 0.16 − 0.20. The parameters r0 and rs describe where the rise takes place and
how steep it is, respectively. As can be seen in Fig. 1
both decrease with time.

varies between r ≈ 108 cm and 109 cm, depending on the
time considered. This way one can fully characterize all
resonances that can take place in the propagation of supernova neutrinos, both the outer resonant conversions
related to neutrino masses and indicated as the upper
bands in Fig. 1, and the inner resonances that follow
from the presence of non-standard neutrino interactions,
indicated by the band at the bottom of the same figure.
Here we pay special attention to the use of realistic matter and chemical supernova profiles and three-neutrino
flavors thus generalising previous studies.

A.

Neutrino Evolution in the Inner Regions

Let us first write the Hamiltonian in the inner layers,
where Hint ≫ Hkin . In this case the Hamiltonian can be
written as
 Y

e
2−Ye + εee εeμ εeτ


H ≈ Hint = V0 ρ(2 − Ye ) 
εeμ
0 εμτ  .
εeτ
εμτ ετ τ
(10)
When the value of the εαβ is of the same order as the
electron fraction Ye internal resonances can arise [13].
Taking into account the current constraints on the ε's
discussed in Sec. II one sees that small values of Ye are
required [46, 47]. As a result, these can only take place
in the most deleptonised inner layers, close to the neutrinosphere, where the kinetic terms of the Hamiltonian
FIG. 1: Density (upper panel) and electron fraction (bottom
panel) profiles for the SN progenitor and at different instants
after the core bounce, from Ref. [60]. The regions where the
H (yellow) and the L (cyan) resonance take place are also
indicated, as well as the NSI-induced I (gray) resonance for
the parameters εee = 0, ετ τ . 0.07 and |εμτ | . 0.05

IV.

THE TWO REGIMES

In order to study the neutrino propagation through
the SN envelope we will split the problem into two different regions: the inner envelope, defined by the condition
VCC ≫ ∆m2atm /(2E) with ∆m2atm ≡ m23 − m22 , and the
outer one, where ∆m2atm /(2E) & VCC . From the upper
panel of Fig. 1 one can see how the boundary roughly

are negligible.
Given the large number of free parameters εαβ involved we consider one particular case where |εeμ | and
|εeτ | are small enough to neglect a possible initial mixing
between νe and νμ or ντ . Barring fine tuning, this basically amounts to |εeμ |, |εeτ | ≪ 10−2 . According to the
discussion of Sec. II εeμ automatically satisfies the condition, whereas one expects that the window |εeτ | & 10−2
will eventually be probed in future experiments.
Since the initial fluxes of νμ and ντ are expected to be
basically identical, it is convenient to redefine the weak
basis by performing a rotation in the μ − τ sector:

 



νe
1
0
0
νe
νe

 




′
 νμ  = U (θ23 )  νμ′  =  0 c23′ s23′   νμ′  ,
ντ′
ντ′
ντ
0 −s23′ c23′
(11)


7
where c23′ and s23′ stand for cos(θ′23 ) and sin(θ′23 ), respectively. The angle θ′23 can be written as
tan(2θ′23 ) ≈

2εμτ
2H23
=
.
H33
ετ τ

(12)

The Hamiltonian becomes in the new basis
′
Hαβ
= U † (θ′23 )Hαβ U (θ′23 )
 Y
e

2−Ye


= V0 ρ(2 − Ye ) 

(13)


+ εee ε′eμ ε′eτ

ε′μμ 0  ,(14)
0 ε′τ τ

ε′eμ
ε′eτ

where
ε′eμ = εeμ c23′ − εeτ s23′

ε′eτ = εeμ s23′ + εeτ c23′
q
ε′μμ = (ετ τ − ε2τ τ + 4ε2μτ )/2
q
ε′τ τ = (ετ τ + ε2τ τ + 4ε2μτ )/2 .

(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)

ing to Eq. (19) for different values of Ye . The region in yel-

With our initial assumptions on εeα one notices that
the new basis να′ basically diagonalizes the Hamiltonian,
and therefore coincides roughly with the matter eigenstate basis. A novel resonance can arise if the condition
′
Hee
= Hτ′ τ is satisfied, we call this I-resonance, I standing for "internal" [96]. The corresponding resonance condition can be written as
YeI =

2εI
,
1 + εI

FIG. 2: Contours of YeI as function of εee and ε′τ τ accord-

(19)

where εI is defined as ε′τ τ − εee . In Fig. 2 we represent
the range of εee and ε′τ τ leading to the I-resonance for
an electron fraction profile between different Yemin 's and
Yemax = 0.5. It is important to notice that the value
of Yemin depends on time. Right before the collapse the
minimum value of the electron fraction is around 0.4.
Hence the window of NSI parameters that would lead
to a resonance would be relatively narrow, as indicated
by the shaded (yellow) band in Fig. 2. As time goes on
Yemin decreases to values of the order of a few %, and
as a result the region of parameters giving rise to the Iresonance significantly widens. For example, in the range
|εee | ≤ 10−3 possibly accessible to future experiments one
sees that the I-resonance can take place for values of ε′τ τ
of the order of O(10−2 ). This indicates that the potential
sensitivity on NSI parameters that can be achieved in supernova studies is better than that of the current limits.

low represents the region of parameters that gives rise to Iresonance before the collapse. The arrows indicate how this
region widens with time.

As seen in Fig. 1 in order to fulfill the I-resonance condition for such small values of the NSI parameters the
values of Ye must indeed lie, as already stated, in the
inner layers.
Several comments are in order: First, in contrast to
the standard H and L-resonances, related to the kinetic
term, the density itself does not explicitly enter into the
resonance condition, provided that the density is high
enough to neglect the kinetic terms. Analogously the energy plays no role in the resonance condition, which is
determined only by the electron fraction Ye . Moreover,
in contrast to the standard resonances, the I-resonance
occurs for both neutrinos and antineutrinos simultaneously [13]. Finally, as indicated in Fig. 3 the νe 's (ν̄e ) are
not created as the heaviest (lightest) state but as the intermediate state, therefore the flavor composition of the
neutrinos arriving at the H-resonance is exactly the opposite of the case without NSI. As we show in Sec. V, this
fact can lead to important observational consequences.
In order to calculate the hopping probability between
matter eigenstates at the I-resonance we use the Landau-

8
H

νe

Zener approximation for two flavors

ντ
_m

μτ

_

νμ

ν3

ν3m

ν2m

ν2m

_

ν1m L

_

ν1m

π

I
PLZ
≈ e − 2 γI ,

H
νμ

where γI stands for the adiabaticity parameter, which
can be generally written as
γI =

_

ντ
_

νe

ne
ντ
νe

H

_

μτ

_

νμ

ν3m

ν3m

ν2

ν2m

_m

_m

ν1

_

I

H

I

νe
_
ντ

ne
H
νe
ντ

_

ν2m

_

νμ

_

ν1m

H

_

ν3m

_

ντ

ν2m

L

νμ

μτ

ν1m

ν3m

_

νe

ne
H

_

_

νμ

I

I
ν2m

_

ν1m

ν1m

H

ντ
νe

ν2m

_

ν3m

′2
4Heτ
(Ḣτ′ τ − Ḣee )

≈ 4 × 10

ν1m L

L

νμ

μτ

ν3m

_

ν_e
ντ

ne

FIG. 3: Level-crossing schemes, first panel is for the case of
normal hierarchy (oscillations only), the second includes the
NSI effect. The two lower panels correspond to the inverse hierarchy, oscillations only and oscillations + NSI, respectively.

E2m − E1m
2θ̇m

,

(21)

rI

where θ̇m ≡ dθm /dr.
If one applies this formula to the e − τ ′ box of Eq. (14) assuming that
′
tan 2θm = 2Heτ
/(Hτ′ τ − Hee ) and E2m − E1m =

 ′ I
′ 1/2
one gets
(Hτ τ − Hee )2 + 4Heτ
γI =

νμ

(20)

9

=

16V0 ρε′2
eτ
(1 + εI )3 Ẏe

rI
I
rs,5 ρ11 ε′2
eτ f (ε )

,

rI

(22)

where the parametrization of the Ye profile has been defined as in Eq. (9) with b = 0.16. The density ρ11 represents the density in units of 1011 g/cm3 , rs,5 stands
for rs in units of 105 cm, and f (εI ) is a function whose
value is of the order O(1) in the range of parameters we
are interested in. Taking all these factors into account
it follows that the internal resonance will be adiabatic
provided that ε′eτ & 10−5 , well below the current limits,
in full numerical agreement with, e. g., Ref. [47].
In Fig. 4 we show the resonance condition as well as
the adiabaticity in terms of ετ τ and εeτ assuming the
other εαβ = 0. In order to illustrate the dependence on
time we consider profiles inspired in the numerical profiles
of Fig. 1 at t = 2 s (upper panel) and 15.7 s (bottom
panel). For definiteness we take Yemin as the electron
fraction at which the density has value of 5 × 1011 g/cm3 .
For comparison with Fig. 2 we have assumed Yemin =
10−2 in the case of 15.7 s. We observe how the border
of adiabaticity depends on ετ τ through the value of the
density at rI which in turn depends on time.
Before moving to the discussion of the outer resonances
a comment is in order, namely, how does the formalism
change for other non-standard interaction models. First
note that the whole treatment presented above also applies to the case of NSI on up-type quarks, except that
the position of the internal resonance shifts with respect
to the down-quark case. Indeed, in this case the NSI
potential
u
(Vnsi
)αβ = εuαβ V0 ρ(1 + Ye ) ,

(23)

9
10-3

I

Plz

εeτ
10-4

1
0.8
0.6

10-5

0.4
-6

10

0.2

10-7
0.001

0
0.01

εττ

0.1

1

-3

I

10
εeτ

Plz

10-4

1
0.8
0.6

10-5

0.4
10-6

0.2

10-7
0.001

0
0.01

εττ

0.1

1

FIG. 4: Contours of constant jump probability at the Iresonance in terms of ετ τ and εeτ for two profiles corresponding to Fig. 1 at 2 s with a = 0.235 and b = 0.175 (upper panel)
and 15.7 s with a = 0.26 and b = 0.195 (bottom panel). For
simplicity the other ε's have been set to zero.

fies the properties of the H and L transitions [48, 49, 50].
In particular one finds that the effects of the NSI can be
described as in the standard case by embedding the ε's
into effective mixing angles [50]. An analogous "confusion" between sin θ13 and the corresponding NSI parameter εeτ has been pointed out in the context of longbaseline neutrino oscillations in Refs. [53, 54].
In this section we perform a more general and complementary study for slightly higher values of the NSI
parameters: |εαβ | & few 10−2 , still allowed by current
limits, and for which the I-resonance could occur.
The phenomenological assumption of hierarchical
squared mass differences, |∆m2atm | ≫ ∆m2⊙ , allows, for
not too large ε's, a factorization of the 3ν dynamics
into two 2ν subsystems roughly decoupled for the H
and L transitions [65]. To isolate the dynamics of the
H transition, one usually rotates the neutrino flavor basis by U † (θ23 ), and extracts the submatrix with indices
(1,3) [48, 50]. Whereas this method works perfectly for
small values of εαβ it can be dangerous for values above
10−2 . In order to analyze how much our case deviates
from the simplest approximation we have performed a
rotation with the angle θ′′23 ≡ θ23 − α instead of just
θ23 . By requiring that the new rotation diagonalizes the
submatrix (2,3) at the H-resonance layer one obtains the
following expression for the correction angle α
tan(2α) =

would induce a similar internal resonance for the condition Ye = εI /(1 − εI ).

In contrast, for the case of NSI with electrons, the
NSI potential is proportional to the electron fraction, and
therefore no internal resonance would appear.

B.

Neutrino Evolution in the Outer Regions

In the outer layers of the SN envelope neutrinos can undergo important flavor transitions at those points where
the matter induced potential equals the kinetic terms.
In absence of NSI this condition can be expressed as
VCC ≈ ∆m2 /(2E). Neutrino oscillation experiments indicate two mass scales, ∆m2atm and ∆m2⊙ ≡ m22 − m21 [5],
hence two different resonance layers arise, the so-called
H-resonance and the L-resonance, respectively.
The presence of NSI with values of |εαβ | . 10−2 modi-


N SI
∆⊙ s212 s13 + VτNτ SI s223 − 2Vμτ
c223 /

1
1
(∆atm + ∆⊙ )c213 + ∆⊙ c212 (−3 + c213 )
2
4

N SI
(24)
+VτNτ SI c223 + 2Vμτ
s223 ,



where ∆atm ≡ ∆m2atm /(2E) and ∆⊙ ≡ ∆m2⊙ /(2E). In
our notation sij and s2ij represent sin θij and sin(2θij ),
respectively. The parameters cij and c2ij are analogously
defined. In the absence of NSI α is just a small correction
to θ23 [97],
tan(2α) ≈ ∆⊙ s212 s13 /∆atm c213 . O(10−3 ) .

(25)

In order to calculate α we need to know the Hresonance point. To calculate it one can proceed as in
the case without NSI, namely, make the θ′′23 rotation and
′′
analyze the submatrix (1, 3). The new Hamiltonian Hαβ
has now the form
′′
Hee
= V0 ρ[Ye + εee (2 − Ye )] + ∆atm s213

10
+∆⊙ (c213 s212 + s213 ) ,
Hτ′′τ = V0 ρ(2 − Ye )ε′′τ τ + ∆atm c213 c2α


+∆⊙ c213 c2α + (sα c12 + cα s12 s13 )2 ,
1
′′
Heτ
= V0 ρ(2 − Ye )ε′′eτ + ∆atm s213 cα
2
1
(26)
+ ∆⊙ (−c13 sα s212 + c212 cα s213 ) .
2
We have defined ε′′τ τ = ετ τ c223−α + εμτ s223−α , and ε′′eτ =
εeτ c23−α +εeμ s23−α , where s23−α ≡ sin(θ23 −α), c23−α ≡
cos(θ23 − α), and s223−α ≡ sin(2θ23 − 2α), c223−α ≡
cos(2θ23 − 2α). The resonance condition for the H tran′′
sition, Hee
= Hτ′′τ can be then written as
V0 ρH [YeH + (εee − ε′′τ τ )(2 − YeH )] = ∆atm (c213 c2α − s213 )

+∆⊙ [c212 (c213 − c2α s213 ) − s2α s212 + 21 s2α s212 s13 ](27).

It can be easily checked how in the limit of εαβ → 0 one
recovers the standard resonance condition,
V0 ρH YeH ≈ ∆atm c213 .

(28)

In the region where the H-resonance occurs YeH ≈ 0.5.
Taking into account Eqs. (24) and (27) one can already
estimate how the value of α changes with the NSI parameters. In Fig. 5 we show the dependence of α on the ετ τ
after fixing the value of the other NSI parameters. One
can see how for ετ τ & 10−2 the approximation of neglecting α significantly worsens. Assuming θ23 = π/4 and a
fixed value of εμτ one can easily see that ετ τ basically
affects the numerator in Eq. (24). Therefore one expects
a rise of α as the value of ετ τ increases, as seen in Fig. 5.
The dependence of α on εμτ is correlated to the relative sign of the mass hierarchy and εμτ . For instance,
for normal mass hierarchy and positive values of εμτ the
dependence is inverse, namely, higher values of εμτ lead
to a suppression of α. Apart from this general behavior, α also depends on the diagonal term εee as seen in
Fig. 5. This effect occurs by shifting the resonance point
through the resonance condition in Eq. (27).
One can now calculate the jump probability between matter eigenstates in analogy to the I-resonance
by means of the Landau-Zener approximation, see
Eqs. (20), (21), and 22,
π

H
PLZ
≈ e − 2 γH ,

(29)

where γH represents the adiabaticity parameter at the

FIG. 5: Angle α as function of ετ τ for different values of εee
and εμτ , in the case of neutrinos of energy 10 MeV, with
normal mass hierarchy, and s213 = 10−5 . The other NSI parameters take the following values: εeμ = 0 and εeτ = 10−3 .

H-resonance, which can be written as
γH =

′′2
4Heτ
′′ )
(Ḣτ′′τ − Ḣee

,

(30)

rH

′′
where the expressions for Hαβ
are given in Eqs (26).
Let us first consider the case |εαβ | . 10−2 . In this case
α ≈ 0 and one can rewrite the adiabaticity parameter as

γH ≈

f
∆atm sin2 (2θef
13 )
f
cos(2θef
13 )|d ln V /dr|rH

,

(31)

where
f
′′
θef
13 = θ13 + εeτ (2 − Ye )/Ye

(32)

in agreement with Ref. [50]. For slightly larger ε's there
H
can be significant differences. In Fig. 6 we show PLZ
in
the εeτ -ετ τ plane for antineutrinos with energy 10 MeV
in the case of inverse mass hierarchy, using Eq. (29) with
(upper panel) and without (bottom panel) the α correction. The values of θ13 and εeτ have been chosen so
that the jump probability lies in the transition regime between adiabatic and strongly non adiabatic. In the limit
of small ετ τ , α becomes negligible and therefore both results coincide. From Eq. (31) one sees how as the value of

11
εeτ increases γH gets larger and therefore the transition
becomes more and more adiabatic. For negative values
of εeτ there can be a cancellation between εeτ and θ13 ,
and as a result the transition becomes non-adiabatic.
An additional consequence of Eq. (32) is that a degeneracy between εeτ and θ13 arises. This is seen in Fig. 7,
H
which gives the contours of PLZ
in terms of εeτ and θ13
−4
for ετ τ = 10 . One sees clearly that the same LandauZener hopping probability is obtained for different combinations of εeτ and θ13 . This leads to an intrinsic "confusion" between the mixing angle and the corresponding
NSI parameter, which can not be disentangled only in
the context of SN neutrinos, as noted in Ref. [50].

We now turn to the case of |ετ τ | ≥ 10−2 . As |ετ τ |
increases the role of α becomes relevant. Whereas in the
H
bottom panel PLZ
remains basically independent of ετ τ ,
H
one can see how in the upper panel PLZ
becomes strongly
−2
sensitive to ετ τ for |ετ τ | ≥ 10 .

One sees that for positive values of ετ τ it tends to adiabaticity whereas for negative values to non-adiabaticity.
′′
This follows from the dependence of Heτ
on α, essentially through the term −∆⊙ c13 sα s212 , see Eq. (26). For
|ετ τ | ≥ 10−2 one sees that sin α starts being important,
and as a result this term eventually becomes of the same
′′
. At this point the sign of
order as the others in Heτ
ετ τ , and so the sign of sin α, is crucial since it may con′′
tribute to the enhancement or reduction of Heτ
. This
directly translates into a trend towards adiabaticity or
non-adiabaticity, seen in Fig. 6. Thus, for the range of
ετ τ relevant for the NSI-induced internal resonance the
adiabaticity of the outer H resonance can be affected in
a non-trivial way.

Turning to the case of the L transition a similar expression can be obtained by rotating the original Hamiltonian
by U (θ13 )† U (θ23 )† [48, 50]. However, in contrast to the
case of the H-resonance, where the mixing angle θ13 is
still unknown, in the case of the L transition the angle
θ12 has been shown by solar and reactor neutrino experiments to be large [5]. As a result, for the mass scale ∆⊙
this transition will always be adiabatic irrespective of the
values of εαβ , and will affect only neutrinos.

FIG. 6: Landau-Zener jump probability isocontours at the Hresonance in terms of εeτ and ετ τ for 10 MeV antineutrinos
in the case of inverted mass hierarchy. Upper panel: α given
by Eq. (24). Bottom panel: α set to zero. The remaining
parameters take the following values: sin2 θ13 = 10−5 , εeτ =
10−3 , εee = εeμ = 0. See text.

V.

OBSERVABLES AND SENSITIVITY

As mentioned in the introduction one of the major motivations to study NSI using the neutrinos emitted in a
SN is the enhancement of the NSI effects on the neutrino
propagation through the SN envelope due to the specific
extreme matter conditions that characterize it. In this
section we analyze how these effects translate into observable effects in the case of a future galactic SN.
Schematically, the neutrino emission by a SN can be divided into four stages: Infall phase, neutronization burst,
accretion, and Kelvin-Helmholtz cooling phase. During
the infall phase and neutronization burst only νe 's are
emitted, while the bulk of neutrino emission is released
in all flavors in the last two phases. Whereas the neutrino
emission characteristics of the two initial stages are basi-

12
wards. On the other hand it is also believed that due to
the composition in matter of the protoneutronstar (PNS)
the mean energies of the different neutrino spectra obey
hEνe i < hEν̄e i < hEνμ ,ντ i. This means that a resonant conversion between νe (ν̄e ) and νμ,τ (ν̄μ,τ ) between
the neutrinosphere and the position of the stalled shock
wave would make the νe (ν̄e ) spectra harder, and therefore the energy deposition would be larger, giving rise to
a shock wave regeneration effect.
Another argument used in the literature was the possibility that the r−process nucleosynthesis, responsible
for synthesizing about half of the heavy elements with
mass number A > 70 in nature, could occur in the region
above the neutrinosphere in SNe [71, 72]. A necessary
FIG. 7: Landau-Zener jump probability isocontours at the
H-resonance in terms of εeτ and θ13 for ετ τ = 10−4 . Antineutrinos with energy 10 MeV and inverted mass hierarchy
has been assumed.

cally independent of the features of the progenitor, such
as the core mass or equation of state (EoS), the details
of the neutrino spectra and luminosity during the accretion and cooling phases may significantly change for
different progenitor models. As a result, a straightforward extraction of oscillation parameters from the bulk
of the SN neutrino signal seems hopeless. Only features
in the detected neutrino spectra which are independent
of unknown SN parameters should be used in such an
analysis [66].
The question then arises as to how can one obtain information about the NSI parameters. Taking into account that the main effect of NSI is to generate new internal neutrino flavor transitions, one possibility is to invoke theoretical arguments that involve different aspects
of the SN internal dynamics.

condition is Ye < 0.5 in the nucleosynthesis region. The
value of the electron fraction depends on the neutrino
absorption rates, which are determined in turn by the
νe (ν̄e ) luminosities and energy distribution. These can
be altered by flavor conversion in the inner layers due to
the presence of NSI. Therefore by requiring the electron
fraction be below 0.5 one can get information about the
values of the NSI parameters.
While it is commonly accepted that neutrinos will play
a crucial role in both the shock wave re-heating as well
as the r−process nucleosynthesis, there are still other astrophysical factors that can affect both. While the issue
remains under debate we prefer to stick to arguments
directly related to physical observables in a large water
Cherenkov detector. There are several possibilities.
(A) the modulations in the ν̄e spectra due to the passage of shock waves through the supernova [58, 59,
60]
(B) the modulation in the ν̄e spectra due to the time
dependence of the electron fraction, induced by the
I-resonance

In Ref. [47] it was argued that such an internal flavor
conversion during the first second after the core bounce
might play a positive role in the so-called SN shock reheating problem. It is observed in numerical simula-

(D) detectability of the neutronization νe burst [77, 78]

tions [67, 68, 69, 70] that as the shock wave propagates it loses energy until it gets stalled at a few hundred km. It is currently believed that after neutrinos
escape the SN core they can to some extent deposit energy right behind and help the shock wave continue out-

Three of these observables, 1, 3 and 4 have already been
considered in the literature in the context of neutrino
oscillations. Here we discuss the potential of the above
promising observables in providing information about the

(C) the modulations in the ν̄e spectra due to the Earth
matter [73, 74, 75, 76]

13
Scheme Hierarchy sin2 θ13 NSI
A
B

normal

−4

& 10

−4

inverted & 10

No

Psurv

P̄surv

0

2

2

No sin θ12

0

any

. 10−6 No sin2 θ12 cos2 θ12

AI

normal

& 10−4 Yes sin2 θ12 sin2 θ12

BI

inverted & 10−4 Yes cos2 θ12 cos2 θ12

CIa

normal

CIb

inverted . 10−6 Yes cos2 θ12

0

Shock wave propagation

cos θ12

C

. 10−6 Yes

A.

sin2 θ12
0

TABLE I: Definition of the neutrino schemes considered in
terms of the hierarchy, the value of θ13 , and the presence
of NSI, as described in the text. The values of the survival
probabilities for νe (Psurv ) and ν̄e (P̄surv ) for each case are
also indicated.

NSI parameters. It is important to pay attention to the
possible ocurrence of the internal I-resonance and to its
effect in the external H and L-resonances. The first can
induce a genuinely new observable effect, item 2 above.
Here we concentrate on neutral current-type nonstandard interactions, hence there will be not effect in the
main reaction in water Cherenkov and scintillator detectors, namely the inverse beta decay, ν̄e + p → e+ + n [98].
For definiteness we take NSI with d (down) quarks, in
which case the NSI effects will be confined to the neutrino evolution inside the SN and the Earth, through the
vector component of the interaction.

During approximately the first two seconds after the
core bounce, the neutrino survival probabilities are constant in time and in energy for all cases mentioned in Table I. Only the Earth effects could introduce an energy
dependence. However, at t ≈ 2 s the H-resonance layer is
reached by the outgoing shock wave, see Fig. 1. The way
the shock wave passage affects the neutrino propagation
strongly depends on the neutrino mixing scenario. In the
absence of NSI cases A and C will not show any evidence
of shock wave propagation in the observed ν̄e spectrum,
either because there is no resonance in the antineutrino
channel as in scenario A, or because the H-resonance is
always strongly non-adiabatic as in scenario C. However, in scenario B, the sudden change in density breaks
the adiabaticity of the resonance, leading to a time and
energy dependence of the electron antineutrino survival
probability P̄surv (E, t). In the upper panel of Fig. 8 we
show P̄surv (E, t) in the particular case that two shock
waves are present, one forward and a reverse one [60].
The presence of the shocks results in the appearance of
bumps in survival probability at those energies for which
the resonance region is passed by the shock waves. All
these structures move in time towards higher energies, as
the shock waves reach regions with lower density, leading
to observable consequences in the ν̄e spectrum.

From all possible combinations of NSI parameters we

We now turn to the case where NSI are present, which
opens the possibility of internal resonances. When such
I-resonance is adiabatic the situation will be similar to
the case without NSI. For normal mass hierarchy, AI and
CIa, ν̄e will not feel the H-resonance and therefore the

will concentrate on those for which the internal I transition does take place, namely |εI | & 10−2 , see Fig. 2.
Concerning the FC NSI parameters we will consider |ε′eτ |
between few × 10−5 and 10−2 , range in which the Iresonance is adiabatic, see Fig. 4. In the following discussion we will focus on the extreme cases defined in Table I.
One of the motivations for considering these cases is the
fact that the resonances involved become either adiabatic

adiabaticity-breaking effect will not basically alter their
propagation. In contrast, for inverted mass hierarchy
and large θ13 , case BI, the H-resonance occurs in the
antineutrino channel and therefore ν̄e will feel the shock
wave passage. However, in contrast to case B now ν̄e will
reach the H-resonance in a different matter eigenstate:
ν̄1m instead of ν̄3m , see Fig. 3. That means that before
the shock wave reaches the H-resonance the ν̄e survival

or strongly non adiabatic, and hence the survival probabilities in the absence of Earth effects or shock wave
passage, become energy independent. This assumption
simplifies the task of relating the observables with the
neutrino schemes.

probability will be P̄surv ≈ cos2 θ12 ≈ 0.7. Once the
adiabaticity of the H-resonance is broken by the shock
wave then ν̄e will partly leave as ν̄3m and therefore the
survival probability will decrease. As a consequence one
expects a pattern in time and energy for the survival

14
servable effect. In the right panels of Fig. 9 we show
the same as in the left panels but for sin2 θ13 = 10−7 .
Whereas for large values of θ13 , left panels, the Hresonance is always adiabatic and one has only to ensure
the adiabaticity of the I-resonance, for smaller values of
θ13 the adiabaticity of the H-resonance strongly depends
on the values of εeτ and ετ τ , as discussed in Sec. IV B.
This can be seen as a significant reduction of the yellow area. Only large values of either εeτ or ετ τ would
still allow for a clear identification of the opposite shock
wave effects. In dark-shaded (cyan) we show the region
of parameters for which PH lies in the transition region
between adiabatic and strongly non-adiabatic, and therefore could still lead to some effect.

FIG. 8: Survival probability P̄surv (E, t) for ν̄e as function
of energy at different times averaged in energies with the energy resolution of Super-Kamiokande; for the profile shown in
Fig. 1. Upper panel: case B is assumed for sin2 θ13 = 10−2 .
Bottom panel: case BI, with ετ τ = 0.07, εeτ = 10−4 and the
rest of NSI parameters put to zero.

probability in the case BI to be roughly opposite than in
the case B, see bottom panel of Fig. 8. The position of
the peaks and dips en each panel do not exactly coincide
as the value of ετ τ roughly shifts the position of the Hresonance.
In the left panels of Fig. 9 we represent in light-shaded
(yellow) the range of εeτ and ετ τ for which this opposite
shock wave imprint would be observable. In the upper
panels we have assumed a minimum value of the electron
fraction of 0.06, based on the numerical profiles at t =
2 s of Fig. 1. In the bottom panels Yemin is set to 0.01,
inspired in the profiles at t = 15.7 s. It can be seen how as
time goes on the range of ετ τ 's for which the I-resonance
takes place widens towards to smaller and smaller values.
This is a direct consequence of the steady deleptonization
of the inner layers.
For smaller θ13 , case CIb, the situation is different.
Except for relatively large εeτ values the H-resonance will
be strongly non-adiabatic, as in case C. Therefore the
passage of the shock waves will not significantly change
the ν̄e survival probability and will not lead to any ob-

A useful observable to detect effects of the shock propagation is the average of the measured positron energies,
hEe i, produced in inverse beta decays. In Fig. 10, we
show hEe i together with the one sigma errors expected for
a Megaton water Cherenkov detector and a SN at 10 kpc
distance, with a time binning of 0.5 s, for different neutrino schemes: case B and case BI with different values of
ετ τ . For the neutrino fluxes we assumed the parametrization given by Refs. [79, 80] with hE0 (ν̄e )i = 15 MeV and
hE0 (ν̄μ,τ )i = 18 MeV and the following ratio of the total
neutrino fluxes Φ0 (ν̄e )/Φ0 (ν̄μ,τ ) = 0.8 [99].

One can see how the features of the average positron
energy are a direct consequence of the shape of the survival probability, where dips have to be translated into
bumps and vice-versa.
Thus, it is important to stress that whereas in case
B one expects the presence of one or two dips (depending on the structure of the shock wave, see Ref [60]), or
nothing in the other cases, one or two bumps are expected in case BI, as seen in the upper left panel of
Fig. 10. As discussed in Ref. [60] the details of the
dips/bump will depend on the exact shape of the neutrino fluxes, but as long as general reasonable assumptions like hEν̄e i . hEν̄μ,τ i are considered the dips/bumps
should be observed.

B.

Time variation of Ye

We have just seen how the distorsion of the density
profile due to the shock wave passage through the outer

15

FIG. 9: Range of ετ τ and εeτ for which the effect of the shock

FIG. 10: The average energy of ν̄p → ne+ events binned in

wave will be observed. In the upper panels a minimum value

time for case B (dashed blue) and BI (solid red). In each

of Yemin = 0.06 based on the numerical profiles at t = 2 s

panel different values of ετ τ have been assumed. The error

has been assumed, see Fig. 1. In the lower panels we have

bars represent 1 σ errors in any bin. εeτ = 10−4 .

considered a case with

Yemin

= 0.01 inspired in the profile

at t = 15.7 s. The value of sin2 θ13 has been assumed to
be 10−2 and 10−7 in the left and right panels, respectively.

increases with time, as can be seen in Fig. 2.

We have also superimposed isocontours of constant hopping

Let us first discuss the observational consequences of
the time dependence of the electron fraction in case BI.
If ετ τ (εI in general) is large enough the I-resonance will
take place right after the core bounce. In this case, as
seen in the upper left panel of Fig. 10 the two bumps we
have just discussed in Sec. V A would be clearly observed.
However for smaller NSI parameter values it could hap-

probability 0.1 (blue) and 0.9 (red) in the I (solid lines) and
H (dashed lines) resonances for inverted mass hierarchy and
E = 10 MeV and antineutrinos. The area in yellow represents
the parameter space where both resonances will be adiabatic.
In the cyan area the I-resonance is assumed to be adiabatic
whereas H lies in the transition region.

As discussed in Sec. IV A the region of NSI parameters leading to I-resonance is basically determined by the

pen that the I-resonance occurs only after several seconds. In particular for the specific Ye profile considered
we show how this delay could be of roughly 2, 4 or 9 sec
for values of ετ τ of 0.025, 0.02 or 0.015, respectively, see
last three panels Fig. 10. As can be inferred from the
figure this delay effect can lead to misidentification of
the pure NSI effect. So, for instance, in the upper right
panel, one sees how the two bumps might also be inter-

minimum and maximum values of the electron fraction,
Yemin and Yemax . The crucial point is that as the deleptonization of the proto-neutron star goes on, the value of
Yemin steadily decreases with time. As a result, the range
of NSI strengths for which the I-resonance takes place

preted as two dips, given the astrophysical uncertainties.
This subtle degeneracy can only be solved by extra information on, for example, the time dependence of the
spectra or the velocity of the shock wave. Given the supernova model, however, the time structure of the signal

SN envelope can induce a time-dependent modulation in
the ν̄e spectrum in cases B and BI. However the time
dependence of the electron fraction Ye can also reveal the
presence of NSI leaving a clear imprint in the observed
ν̄e spectrum, as we now explain.

16
could eventually not only point out the presence of NSI
but even potentially indicate a range of NSI parameters.
Let us now turn to the normal mass hierarchy scenario (cases AI and CIa). In analogy to the BI case,
if εI is relatively large the onset of the I-resonance will
take place early on. As can be inferred from Fig. 3 that
implies that ν̄e will escape the SN as ν̄2 . For smaller
values, though, it may happen that the I-resonance becomes effective only after a few seconds. This means
that during the first seconds of the neutrino signal ν̄e
would leave the star as ν̄1 (cases A and C). Then,
after some point, the electron fraction would be low
enough to switch on the I-resonance, and consequently
ν̄e would enter the Earth as ν̄2 . This would result in
a transition in the electron antineutrino survival probability from P̄surv ≈ cos2 θ12 = 0.7 to sin2 θ12 = 0.3.
Given the expected hierarchy in the average neutrino energies hEν̄e i . hEν̄μ,τ i, it follows that the change in Ye
would lead to a hardening of the observed positron spectrum. The effect is quantified in Fig. 11 for different
values of ετ τ . The figure shows the average energy of
the ν̄p → ne+ events for the case of a Megaton water
Cherenkov detector exactly as in Fig. 10, but for scenarios AI and CIa. One can see how for ετ τ = 0.07 the Iresonance condition is always fulfilled and therefore there
is no time dependence. However for smaller values one
can see a rise at a certain moment which depends on the
magnitude of ετ τ . A similar effect would occur in case
CIb.

C.

Earth matter effects

FIG. 11: The average energy of ν̄p → ne+ events binned in
time for case AI and CIa and different values of ετ τ . The
error bars represent 1 σ errors in any bin. εeτ = 10−4 .

In the presence of NSI ν̄e will arrive at the Earth as ν̄1
in cases BI, and as ν̄2 in case AI and CIa. Therefore
its observation would exclude cases B and CIb. This
distortion in the spectra could be measured by comparing the neutrino signal at two or more different detectors
such that the neutrinos travel different distances through
the Earth before reaching them [73, 74]. However these
Earth matter effects can be also identified in a single detector [75, 76].
By analyzing the power spectrum of the detected neutrino events one can identify the presence of peaks located
at the frequencies characterizing the modulation. These

Before the shock wave reaches the H-resonance layer
the dependence of the neutrino survival probability in the
cases we are considering, on the neutrino energy E is very
weak. However, if neutrinos cross the Earth before reaching the detector, the conversion probabilities may become
energy-dependent, inducing modulations in the neutrino
energy spectrum. These modulations may be observed

do not dependend on the primary neutrino spectra, and
can be determined to a good accuracy from the knowledge of the solar oscillation parameters, the Earth matter
density, and the position of the SN in the sky [76]. The
latter can be determined with sufficient precision even if
the SN is optically obscured using the pointing capability
of water Cherenkov neutrino detectors [81].

in the form of local peaks and valleys in the spectrum of
the event rate σFν̄De plotted as a function of 1/E. These
modulations arise in the antineutrino channel only when
ν̄e leave the SN as ν̄1 or ν̄2 . In the absence of NSI this
happens in cases A and C, where ν̄e leave the star as ν̄1 .

This method turns out to be powerful in detecting the
modulations in the spectra due to Earth matter effects,
and thus in ruling out cases B and CIb. However, the position of the peaks does not depend on how ν̄e enters the
Earth, as ν̄1 or ν̄2 . Hence it is not useful to discriminate

17
case AI and CIa from the cases A, C, and BI.
The time dependence of Ye , however, can transform
case B into BI, and C with inverse hierarchy into CIb,
leading respectively to an appearance and disappearance
of these Earth matter effects. In case BI the presence of
the shock wave modulation can spoil a clear identification
of the Earth matter effects. Nevertheless, the disappearance of the Earth matter effects in the transition from
case C to CIb allows us to pin down case CIb.

D.

Neutronization burst

The prompt neutronization burst takes place during
the first ∼ 25 ms after the core bounce with a typical
full width half maximum of 5–7 ms and a peak luminosity of 3.3–3.5×1053 erg s−1. The striking similarity of the
neutrino emission characteristics despite the variability
in the properties of the pre-collapse cores is caused by
a regulation mechanism between electron number fraction and target abundances for electron capture. This
effectively establishes similar electron fractions in the inner core during collapse, leading to a convergence of the
structure of the central part of the collapsing cores, with
only small differences in the evolution of different progenitors until shock breakout [77, 78].
Taking into account that the SN will be likely to be
obscured by dust and a good estimation of the distance
will not be possible, the time structure of the detected
neutrino signal should be used as signature for the neutronization burst. In Ref. [78] it was shown that such a
time structure can be in principle cleanly seen in the
case of a Megaton water Cherenkov detector. It was
also shown how the time evolution of the signal depends
strongly on the neutrino mixing scheme. In the absence
of NSI the νe peak could be observed provided that the
νe survival probability Pνe νe is not zero. As can be seen
in Table I this happens for cases B and C. However
for case A (normal mass hierarchy and "large" θ13 ), νe
leaves the SN as ν3 . This leads to a survival probability
Pνe νe ≈ sin2 θ13 . 10−1 , and therefore the peak remains
hidden.
Let us now consider the situation where NSI are
prensent. For normal mass hierarchy νe , which is born
as ν2m passes through three different resonances, I, H

and L. Whereas I and L will be adiabatic, the fate of
H will depend on the value of θ13 . For "large" values,
case AI, the H-resonance will also be adiabatic. This
implies that νe 's will leave as ν2 , the survival probability
will be Pνe νe ≈ sin2 θ12 ≈ 0.3, and therefore the peak
will be seen, as in cases B and C. If θ13 happens to
be very small, case CIa, then H will be strongly nonadiabatic and therefore νe will leave the star as ν3 . As a
consequence the neutronization peak will not be seen.

For inverse mass hierarchy, νe is born as ν1m and traverses adiabatically I and L. This implies that they will
leave the star as ν1 and therefore the peak will also be
observed. However now the survival probability will be
larger, Pνe νe ≈ cos2 θ12 ≈ 0.7. Thus for a given known
normalization, i.e. the distance to the SN, one expects a
larger number of events during the neutronization peak
in this case. In Fig. 12 we show the expected number
of events per time bin in a water Cherenkov detector in
the case of a SN exploding at 10 kpc, for two different
neutrino schemes, C and BI, and for different SN progenitor masses. One can see how the difference due to
the larger survival probability is bigger than the typical error bars, associated to the lack of knowledge of the
progenitor mass.
Two comments are in order. The neutronization νe
burst takes place during the first milliseconds, before
strong deleptonization takes place. As a result, in contrast to other observables we have considered in this paper, here the I-resonance will only occur for εI & 10−1 .
On the other hand in the presence of additional NSI with
electrons this would significantly affect the ν − e cross
sections, and consequently the results presented here.

VI.

SUMMARY

We have analyzed the possibility of observing clear signatures of non-standard neutrino interactions from the
detection of neutrinos produced in a future galactic supernova.
In Secs. III and IV we have re-considered effect of ν − d
non-standard interactions on the neutrino propagation
through the SN envelope within a three-neutrino framework. In contrast to previous works we have analyzed
the neutrino evolution in both the more deleptonized in-

18
Earth matter effects; and, finally, through the possible
detectability of the neutronization νe burst. Note that
observable (ii) turns out to be complementary to the observation of the shock wave passage, (i), and offers the
possibility to probe NSI effects also for normal hierarchy
neutrino spectra.
In Table II we summarize the results obtained for different neutrino schemes. We have found that observable
(i) can clearly indicate the existence of NSI in the case
of inverse mass hierarchy and large θ13 (case BI). On
the other hand, observable (ii) allows for an identification
of NSI effects in the other cases, normal mass hierarchy
(cases AI and CIa) and inverse mass hierarchy and small
θ13 (case CIb). Therefore a positive signal of either ob-

FIG. 12: Number of events from the elastic scattering on electrons, per time bin in a Megaton water Cherenkov detector for
a SN at 10 kpc for cases C (dashed lines) and BI (solid lines).
Different progenitor masses have been assumed: 13 M⊙ (n13)
in red, 15 M⊙ (s15s7b2) in black, and 25 M⊙ (s25a28) in blue.
1-sigma errors are also shown for the 15 M⊙ case.

ner layers and the outer regions of the SN envelope. We
have also taken into account the time dependence of the
SN density and electron fraction profiles.
First we have found that the small values of the electron fraction typical of the former allows for internal NSIinduced resonant conversions, in addition to the standard
MSW-H and MSW-L resonances of the outer envelope.
These new flavor conversions take place for a relatively
large range of NSI parameters, namely |εαα | between

10−2 − 10−1 , and |εeτ | & few × 10−5 , currently allowed
by experiment. For this range of strengths, in particular ετ τ , non-standard interactions can significantly affect
the adiabaticity of the H-resonance. On the other hand
the NSI-induced resonant conversions may also lead to
the modulation of the ν̄e spectra as a result of the time
dependence of the electron fraction.
In Sec. V we have studied the possibility of detecting
NSI effects in a Megaton water Cherenkov detector using the modulation effects in the ν̄e spectrum due to (i)
the passage of shock waves through the SN envelope, (ii)
the time dependence of the electron fraction and (iii) the

servable (i) or (ii) would establish the existence of NSI. In
the latter case this would, however, leave a degeneracy
among cases AI, CIa, and CIb. Such degeneracy can
be broken with the help of observables (iii) and the observation of the neutronization νe burst. The detection
of Earth matter effects during the whole supernova neutrino signal would rule out case CIb since, as discussed in
Sec. V C, a disappearance of Earth matter effects would
take place due to a transition from C to CIb. Finally,
the (non) observation of the neutronization burst can be
used to distinguish between cases AI and CIa.
Similarly, other degeneracies in Table II may be lifted
by suitably combining different observables. For example, a negative of observable (ii) could mean either negligible NSI strengths or (NU) NSI parameter values so
large that the internal resonance is always present. In
this case one could use the observation of the neutronization burst in order to establish the presence of NSI for
the case of inverse mass hierarchy. In addition the observation of the shock wave imprint in the ν̄e spectrum
would provide additional information on θ13 .
In conclusion, by suitably combining all observables
one may establish not only the presence of NSI, but also
the mass hierarchy and probe the magnitude of θ13 .

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank H-Th. Janka, O. Miranda,
S. Pastor, Th. Schwetz, and M. Tórtola for fruitful discussions. Work supported by the Spanish grant FPA2005-

19
Scheme Hierarchy sin2 θ13 NSI shock Ye Earth νe burst
A
B
C
AI
BI

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

any

. 10−6 No

No

No

Yes

Yes

normal

−4

No

Yes Yes

Yes

01269 and European Network of Theoretical Astroparticle Physics ILIAS/N6 under contract number RII3-CT2004-506222. A. E. has been supported by a FPU grant
from the Spanish Government. R. T. has been supported
by the Juan de la Cierva program from the Spanish Gov-

Yes⋆

ernment and by an ERG from the European Commission.

normal

−4

No

No

No

−4

& 10

inverted & 10
& 10

Yes

⋆

−4

Yes Yes

No

−6

inverted & 10
. 10

Yes

No

Yes

CIa

normal

Yes

No

Yes Yes

CIb

inverted . 10−6 Yes

No

Yes

No

No
Yes⋆

TABLE II: Expectations for the observables discussed in the
text: modulation of the ν̄e spectrum due to the shock wave
passage, the time variation of Ye , the Earth effect, and the
observation of the νe burst within various neutrino schemes.
Asterisks indicate that the effect differs from that expected

References

in the absence of NSI. See text.

[1] KamLAND collaboration, K. Eguchi et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett. 90, 021802 (2003), [hep-ex/0212021].
[2] S. Pakvasa and J. W. F. Valle, hep-ph/0301061, Proc. of
the Indian National Academy of Sciences on Neutrinos,
Vol. 70A, No.1, p.189 - 222 (2004), Eds. D. Indumathi,
M.V.N. Murthy and G. Rajasekaran.
[3] V. Barger,
D. Marfatia and K. Whisnant,
hep-ph/0308123.
[4] KamLAND collaboration, T. Araki et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett. 94, 081801 (2004).
[5] M. Maltoni, T. Schwetz, M. A. Tortola and J. W. F.
Valle, New J. Phys. 6, 122 (2004), Appendix C in
hep-ph/0405172 (v5) provides updated neutrino oscillation results taking into account new SSM, new SNO salt
data, latest K2K and MINOS data; previous works by
other groups are referenced therein.
[6] J. Schechter and J. W. F. Valle, Phys. Rev. D22, 2227
(1980).
[7] J. W. F. Valle, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 53, 473 (2006),
[hep-ph/0608101], Review based on lectures at the Corfu
Summer Institute on Elementary Particle Physics in
September 2005.
[8] J. Schechter and J. W. F. Valle, Phys. Rev. D24, 1883
(1981), Err. D25, 283 (1982).
[9] C.-S. Lim and W. J. Marciano, Phys. Rev. D37, 1368
(1988).
[10] E. K. Akhmedov, Phys. Lett. B213, 64 (1988).
[11] L. Wolfenstein, Phys. Rev. D17, 2369 (1978).
[12] Mikheev, S. P. and Smirnov, A. Yu., (Editions Frontières,
Gif-sur-Yvette, 1986, p.355.), 86 Massive Neutrinos in
Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Proceedings of the
Sixth Moriond Workshop, ed. by Fackler, O. and Tran

Thanh Van, J.
[13] J. W. F. Valle, Phys. Lett. B199, 432 (1987).
[14] R. N. Mohapatra and J. W. F. Valle, Phys. Rev. D34,
1642 (1986).
[15] J. Bernabeu et al., Phys. Lett. B187, 303 (1987).
[16] G. C. Branco, M. N. Rebelo and J. W. F. Valle, Phys.
Lett. B225, 385 (1989).
[17] N. Rius and J. W. F. Valle, Phys. Lett. B246, 249 (1990).
[18] F. Deppisch and J. W. F. Valle, Phys. Rev. D72, 036001
(2005), [hep-ph/0406040].
[19] A. Zee, Phys. Lett. B93, 389 (1980).
[20] K. S. Babu, Phys. Lett. B203, 132 (1988).
[21] L. J. Hall, V. A. Kostelecky and S. Raby, Nucl. Phys.
B267, 415 (1986).
[22] M. Malinsky, J. C. Romao and J. W. F. Valle, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 95, 161801 (2005), [hep-ph/0506296].
[23] A. B. McDonald, astro-ph/0406253.
[24] K. Scholberg, astro-ph/0701081.
[25] LSND, L. B. Auerbach et al., Phys. Rev. D63, 112001
(2001), [hep-ex/0101039].
[26] MUNU, Z. Daraktchieva et al., Phys. Lett. B564, 190
(2003), [hep-ex/0304011].
[27] CHARM, J. Dorenbosch et al., Phys. Lett. B180, 303
(1986).
[28] CHARM-II, P. Vilain et al., Phys. Lett. B335, 246
(1994).
[29] NuTeV, G. P. Zeller et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 091802
(2002), [hep-ex/0110059].
[30] V. D. Barger, R. J. N. Phillips and K. Whisnant, Phys.
Rev. D44, 1629 (1991).
[31] S. Davidson, C. Pena-Garay, N. Rius and A. Santamaria,
JHEP 03, 011 (2003), [hep-ph/0302093].

20
[32] J. Barranco, O. G. Miranda, C. A. Moura and J. W. F.
Valle, Phys. Rev. D73, 113001 (2006), [hep-ph/0512195].
[33] Z. Berezhiani and A. Rossi, Phys. Lett. B535, 207
(2002), [hep-ph/0111137].
[34] A. Friedland, C. Lunardini and C. Pena-Garay, Phys.
Lett. B594, 347 (2004), [hep-ph/0402266].
[35] M. M. Guzzo, P. C. de Holanda and O. L. G. Peres, Phys.
Lett. B591, 1 (2004), [hep-ph/0403134].
[36] O. G. Miranda, M. A. Tortola and J. W. F. Valle, JHEP
10, 008 (2006), [hep-ph/0406280].
[37] N. Fornengo et al., Phys. Rev. D65, 013010 (2002),
[hep-ph/0108043].
[38] A. Friedland, C. Lunardini and M. Maltoni, Phys. Rev.
D70, 111301 (2004), [hep-ph/0408264].
[39] A. Friedland and C. Lunardini, Phys. Rev. D72, 053009
(2005), [hep-ph/0506143].
[40] G. Mangano et al., Nucl. Phys. B756, 100 (2006),
[hep-ph/0607267].
[41] S. K. Katsanevas, talk at Workshop on Neutrino Oscillation Physics (NOW 2006), Otranto, Lecce, Italy, 9-16
Sep 2006.
[42] P. S. Amanik, G. M. Fuller and B. Grinstein, Astropart.
Phys. 24, 160 (2005), [hep-ph/0407130].
[43] P. S. Amanik and G. M. Fuller, astro-ph/0606607.
[44] S. P. Mikheev and A. Y. Smirnov, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys.
42, 913 (1985).
[45] S. P. Mikheev and A. Y. Smirnov, Nuovo Cim. C9, 17
(1986).
[46] H. Nunokawa, Y. Z. Qian, A. Rossi and J. W. F. Valle,
Phys. Rev. D54, 4356 (1996), [hep-ph/9605301].
[47] H. Nunokawa, A. Rossi and J. W. F. Valle, Nucl. Phys.
B482, 481 (1996), [hep-ph/9606445].
[48] S. Mansour and T.-K. Kuo, Phys. Rev. D58, 013012
(1998), [hep-ph/9711424].
[49] S. Bergmann and A. Kagan, Nucl. Phys. B538, 368
(1999), [hep-ph/9803305].
[50] G. L. Fogli, E. Lisi, A. Mirizzi and D. Montanino, Phys.
Rev. D66, 013009 (2002), [hep-ph/0202269].
[51] T.-K. Kuo and J. T. Pantaleone, Phys. Rev. D37, 298
(1988).
[52] S. Bergmann,
Nucl. Phys. B515, 363 (1998),
[hep-ph/9707398].
[53] P. Huber, T. Schwetz and J. W. F. Valle, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 88, 101804 (2002), [hep-ph/0111224].
[54] P. Huber, T. Schwetz and J. W. F. Valle, Phys. Rev.
D66, 013006 (2002), [hep-ph/0202048].
[55] Particle Data Group, W. M. Yao et al., J. Phys. G33, 1
(2006).
[56] F. J. Botella, C. S. Lim and W. J. Marciano, Phys. Rev.
D35, 896 (1987).
[57] S. E. Woosley, A. Heger and T. A. Weaver, Reviews of
Modern Physics 74, 1015 (2002).
[58] R. C. Schirato, G. M. Fuller, . U. . LANL), UCSD and

LANL), astro-ph/0205390.
[59] G. L. Fogli, E. Lisi, D. Montanino and A. Mirizzi, Phys.
Rev. D68, 033005 (2003), [hep-ph/0304056].
[60] R. Tomas et al.,
JCAP 0409, 015 (2004),
[astro-ph/0407132].
[61] C. Y. Cardall, astro-ph/0701831.
[62] H. A. Bethe, J. H. Applegate and G. E. Brown, Astrophys. J. 241, 343 (1980).
[63] A. Burrows and T. J. Mazurek. Astrophys. J. 259, 330
(1982).
[64] H. Th. Janka, private communication.
[65] T.-K. Kuo and J. T. Pantaleone, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61,
937 (1989).
[66] M. Kachelriess and R. Tomas, hep-ph/0412100.
[67] M. Liebendoerfer et al., Phys. Rev. D63, 103004 (2001),
[astro-ph/0006418].
[68] M. Rampp and H. T. Janka, Astron. Astrophys. 396,
361 (2002), [astro-ph/0203101].
[69] T. A. Thompson, A. Burrows and P. A. Pinto, Astrophys.
J. 592, 434 (2003), [astro-ph/0211194].
[70] K. Sumiyoshi et al., Astrophys. J. 629, 922 (2005),
[astro-ph/0506620].
[71] Y.-Z. Qian, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 50, 153 (2003),
[astro-ph/0301422].
[72] J. Pruet, S. E. Woosley, R. Buras, H.-T. Janka and
R. D. Hoffman,
Astrophys. J. 623, 325 (2005),
[astro-ph/0409446].
[73] C. Lunardini and A. Y. Smirnov, Nucl. Phys. B616, 307
(2001), [hep-ph/0106149].
[74] A. S. Dighe, M. T. Keil and G. G. Raffelt, JCAP 0306,
005 (2003), [hep-ph/0303210].
[75] A. S. Dighe, M. T. Keil and G. G. Raffelt, JCAP 0306,
006 (2003), [hep-ph/0304150].
[76] A. S. Dighe, M. Kachelriess, G. G. Raffelt and R. Tomas,
JCAP 0401, 004 (2004), [hep-ph/0311172].
[77] K. Takahashi, K. Sato, A. Burrows and T. A. Thompson,
Phys. Rev. D68, 113009 (2003), [hep-ph/0306056].
[78] M. Kachelriess et al., Phys. Rev. D71, 063003 (2005),
[astro-ph/0412082].
[79] M. T. Keil, PhD thesis TU München 2003
[astro-ph/0308228].
[80] M. T. Keil, G. G. Raffelt and H. T. Janka, Astrophys. J.
590 (2003) 971 [astro-ph/0208035].
[81] R. Tomas, D. Semikoz, G. G. Raffelt, M. Kachelriess
and A. S. Dighe, Phys. Rev. D68, 093013 (2003),
[hep-ph/0307050].
[82] H. Nunokawa, V. B. Semikoz, A. Y. Smirnov and J. W. F.
Valle, Nucl. Phys. B501, 17 (1997), [hep-ph/9701420].
[83] H. Duan, G. M. Fuller, J. Carlson and Y.-Z. Qian, Phys.
Rev. D74, 105014 (2006), [astro-ph/0606616].
[84] H. Duan, G. M. Fuller, J. Carlson and Y.-Z. Qian, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 97, 241101 (2006), [astro-ph/0608050].
[85] S. Hannestad, G. G. Raffelt, G. Sigl and Y. Y. Y. Wong,

21
Phys. Rev. D74, 105010 (2006), [astro-ph/0608695].
[86] G. G. Raffelt and G. G. R. Sigl, hep-ph/0701182.
[87] A. B. Balantekin, J. M. Fetter and F. N. Loreti, Phys.
Rev. D54, 3941 (1996), [astro-ph/9604061].
[88] H. Nunokawa, A. Rossi, V. B. Semikoz and J. W. F.
Valle, Nucl. Phys. B472, 495 (1996), [hep-ph/9602307].
[89] G. L. Fogli, E. Lisi, A. Mirizzi and D. Montanino, JCAP
0606, 012 (2006), [hep-ph/0603033].
[90] A. Friedland and A. Gruzinov, astro-ph/0607244.
[91] Axial couplings would affect neutrino propagation in polarized media, see Ref. [82].
[92] However we have confined ourselves to values of εeα small
enough not to lead to drastic consequences during the
core collapse.
[93] For the sake of simplicity we will omit the superindex V .
[94] The importance of collective flavor neutrino conversions
driven by neutrino-neutrino interactions has been recently noted in Refs. [83, 84, 85, 86]. Here we consider
only the case where the effective potential felt by neutrinos comes from their interactions with electrons, protons
and neutrons. In a future work we plan to include this

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

effect and have a complete picture of the neutrino propagation.
Here we neglect the possible effects of density fluctuations [87, 88] taking place during the shock wave propagation. For a detailed study of the phenomenological
consequences see Refs. [89, 90].
′
′
The alternative condition Hee
= Hμμ
would give rise to
another internal resonance which can be studied using
the same method. For brevity, we will not pursue this in
this paper.
Note that, in the limit of high densities one recovers
the rotation angle obtained for the internal I-resonance
θ′′23 → θ′23 after neglecting the kinetic terms.
For the case of NSI with electrons both the vector and
axial components of εeαβ will contribute to the ν − e cross
section.
We assume that for the values of the NSI parameters considered the initial neutrino spectra do not significantly
change.

