The Spitzer c2d Survey of Large, Nearby, Insterstellar Clouds. IX.
The Serpens YSO Population As Observed With IRAC and MIPS

arXiv:0704.0009v1 [astro-ph] 2 Apr 2007

Paul Harvey1 , Bruno Merı́n2 , Tracy L. Huard3 , Luisa M. Rebull4 , Nicholas Chapman5 ,
Neal J. Evans II1 , Philip C. Myers3
ABSTRACT
We discuss the results from the combined IRAC and MIPS c2d Spitzer Legacy
observations of the Serpens star-forming region. In particular we present a set of
criteria for isolating bona fide young stellar objects, YSO's, from the extensive
background contamination by extra-galactic objects. We then discuss the properties of the resulting high confidence set of YSO's. We find 235 such objects in
the 0.85 deg2 field that was covered with both IRAC and MIPS. An additional
set of 51 lower confidence YSO's outside this area is identified from the MIPS
data combined with 2MASS photometry. To understand the properties of the
circumstellar material that produces the observed infrared emission, we describe
two sets of results, the use of color-color diagrams to compare our observed source
properties with those of theoretical models for star/disk/envelope systems and
our own modeling of the subset of our objects that appear to be well represented
by a stellar photosphere plus circumstellar disk. These objects exhibit a very
wide range of disk properties, from many that can be fit with actively accreting
disks to some with both passive disks and even possibly debris disks. We find
that the luminosity function of YSO's in Serpens extends down to at least a
few ×10−3 L⊙ or lower for an assumed distance of 260 pc. The lower limit may
be set by our inability to distinguish YSO's from extra-galactic sources more
than by the lack of YSO's at very low luminosities. We find no evidence for
1

Astronomy Department, University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station C1400, Austin, TX 787120259; pmh@astro.as.utexas.edu, nje@astro.as.utexas.edu
2

Research and Scientific Support Dept., ESTEC (ESA), Keplerlaan, 1, PO Box 299, 2200 AG Noordwijk, The Netherlands and Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, Postbus 9513, 2300 RA Leiden, The
Netherlands; bmerin@rssd.esa.int
3

Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, 60 Garden Street,
thuard@cfa.harvard.edu, pmyers@cfa.harvard.edu

MS42,

Cambridge,

MA 02138;

4

Spitzer Science Center, MC 220-6, Pasadena, CA 91125; rebull@ipac.caltech.edu

5

Astronomy Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742; chapman@astro.umd.edu

–2–
variability in the shorter IRAC bands between the two epochs of our data set,
∆t ∼ 6 hours. A spatial clustering analysis shows that the nominally less-evolved
YSO's are more highly clustered than the later stages and that the background
extra-galactic population can be fit by the same two-point correlation function as
seen in other extra-galactic studies. We also present a table of matches between
several previous infrared and X-ray studies of the Serpens YSO population and
our Spitzer data set. The clusters in Serpens have a very high surface density
of YSOs, primarily with SEDs suggesting extreme youth. The total number of
YSOs, mostly Class II, is greater in the region outside the clusters.
Subject headings: infrared: general - clouds: star forming regions

1.

Introduction

The Serpens star-forming cloud is one of five such large clouds selected for observation
as part of The Spitzer Legacy project "From Molecular Cores to Planet-forming Disks" (c2d)
(Evans et al. 2003). Previous papers in this series have described the observational results in
the Serpens Cloud as seen with IRAC (Harvey et. al. 2006)(Paper I) and MIPS (Harvey et al.
2007) as well as some of the other clouds (Jorgensen et al. 2006; Rebull et al. 2006). In this
paper we examine how the combination of the IRAC and MIPS data together with other
published results on this region can be used to find and characterize a highly reliable catalog
of young stellar objects (YSO's) in the surveyed area. With the combination of broad
wavelength coverage and amazing depth of Spitzer's sensitivity we are able to probe to both
extremely low luminosity limits for YSO's and to cover a very wide range in dust emission,
both in optical depth and in range of emitting temperatures. The Spitzer wavelength region
is particularly well tuned for sensitivity to dust at temperatures appropriate for solar-system
size disks around young stars.
The region of the Serpens Cloud mapped in our survey is an area rich in star formation. Eiroa, Djupvik & Casali (2007) have extensively reviewed studies at a variety of
wavelengths of this area. There is evidence from previous observations of strong clustering (Testi et al. 2000; Testi & Sargent 1998), dense sub-mm cores (Casali, Eiroa & Duncan
1993; Enoch et al. 2007), and high-velocity outflows (Ziener & Eisloffel 1999; Davis et al.
1999). Pre-Spitzer infrared surveys of the cloud have been made by IRAS (Zhang et al. 1988;
Zhang, Laureijs, & Clark 1988) and ISO (Kaas et al. 2004; Djupvik et al. 2006) as well as the
pioneering ground-based surveys that first identified it as an important region of star formation (Strom, Vrba & Strom 1976). Using MIPS and all four bands of IRAC the c2d program
has mapped a 0.85 deg2 portion of this cloud that includes a very well-studied cluster of in-

–3–
frared and sub-millimeter sources (Eiroa & Casali 1992; Hogerheijde, van Dishoeck, & Salverda
1999; Hurt & Barsony 1996; Harvey, Wilking, & Joy 1984; Testi & Sargent 1998). At its
distance of 260 ± 10 pc (Straizys, Cernis, & Bartasiute 1996) this corresponds to an area of
about 2.5 × 9 pc. In paper I we identified at least two main centers of star formation as
seen by Spitzer in this cloud, that we referred to as Cluster A and B. Cluster A is the very
well-studied grouping also commonly referred to as the Serpens Core. Cluster B was the
subject of a recent multi-wavelength study by Djupvik et al. (2006), who referred to it as
the Serpens G3-G6 cluster.
The 235 YSO's with high signal-to-noise that we have catalogued constitute a sufficiently
large number that we can examine statistically the numbers of objects in various evolutionary
states and the range of disk properties for different classes of YSO's. We characterize the
circumstellar material with color-color diagrams that allow comparison with other recent
studies of star-forming regions, and we model the energy distributions of the large number
of YSO's that appear to be star+circumstellar disk systems. We are able to construct the
YSO luminosity function for Serpens since we have complete spectral coverage for all the
sources over the range of wavelengths where their luminosity is emitted, and we are able to
characterize the selection effects inherent in the luminosity function from comparison with
the publicly available and signicantly deeper SWIRE survey (Surace et al. 2004). We find
that the population of YSO's extends down to luminosities below 10−2 L⊙ , and we discuss the
significance of this population. Our complete coverage in wavelength and luminosity space
also permits us to discuss the spatial distribution of YSO's to an unprecedented completeness
level. We note also that, unlike the situation discussed by Jorgensen et al. (2006) for Perseus,
in Serpens there do not appear to be any very deeply embedded YSO's that are not found
by our YSO selection criteria.
In §2 we briefly review the observational details of this program and then in §3 we
describe in detail the process by which we identify YSO's and eliminate background contaminants. In §4 we describe a search for variability in our dataset. We compare our general
results on YSO's with those of earlier studies of the Serpens star-forming region in §5. We
discuss in §6 the YSO luminosity function in Serpens and, in particular, the low end of this
function. We next analyze the spatial distribution of star formation in the surveyed area
and compare it to the distribution of dust extinction as derived from our observations in
§7. In §8 we construct several color-color diagrams that characterize the global properties
of the circumstellar material and show modeling results for a large fraction of our YSO's
that appear to be star+disk systems. Finally, §9 discusses several specific groups of objects
including the coldests YSO's and a previously identified "disappearing" YSO. We also mention several obvious high-velocity outflows from YSO's that will certainly be the subject of
further study.

–4–
2.

Observations

The parameters of our observations have already been described in detail in Paper I for
IRAC and in a companion study (Harvey et al. 2007) for MIPS. We summarize here some
of the issues most relevant to this study.
We remind the reader that the angular resolution of the Spitzer imaging instruments
varies widely with wavelength, since Spitzer is diffraction limited longward of λ ∼ 10μm. In
the shorter IRAC bands the spatial resolution is of order 2′′ , while from 24–160μm, it goes
from roughly 5′′ to 50′′ . The area chosen for mapping was defined by the AV > 6 contour
in the extinction map of Cambrésy (1999) and by practical time constraints (Evans et al.
2003). With the exception of a small area of 0.04 deg2 on the northeast edge of the IRAC
map, all of the area mapped with IRAC was also covered with MIPS at both 24 and 70μm,
and most of it at 160μm. As described by Harvey et al. (2007), some substantial additional
area was observed with MIPS without matching IRAC observations. In this current paper
we restrict our attention to only the area that was observed from 3.6 to 70μm, 0.85 deg2 .
This entire region was observed from 3.6 to 24μm at two epochs, with a time separation of
several hours to several days, but at only one epoch at 70μm. We also specifically do not
include the 160μm observations in our discussion because they did not cover the entire area
and because most of the YSO's in Serpens are too closely clustered to be distinguishable in
the large beam of the 160μm data. Harvey et al. (2007) discuss briefly the extended 160μm
emission in this region and the four point-like sources found at 160μm. Figure 1 shows the
entire area mapped with all four IRAC bands and MIPS at 24 and 70μm and also indicates
the locations of several areas mentioned in the text.
In addition to this area of the Serpens cloud defined by relatively high AV , we also
observed small off-cloud regions around the molecular cloud with relatively low AV in order
to determine the background star and galaxy counts. The area of combined IRAC/MIPS
coverage of these off-cloud regions, however, was relatively small and so these observations
are not discussed further in this paper. As detailed below, we have used the much larger
and deeper SWIRE (Surace et al. 2004) survey to understand the characteristics of the most
serious background contaminants in our maps, the extra-galactic objects.

3.

YSO Selection

Paper I described a process for classifying infrared objects into several categories: those
whose energy distributions could be well-fitted as reddened stellar photospheres, those that
had a high likelihood of being background galaxies, and those that were viable YSO candi-

–5–

Fig. 1.- Three color image of the area mapped in Serpens. The color mapping is:
blue/4.5μm, green/8.0μm, and red/24μm. The locations of Cluster A (Core Cluster), Cluster
B (Serpens G3-G6 Cluster), and VV Ser are indicated.

–6–
dates. We have refined this process by combining MIPS and IRAC data together as well as
by producing an improved comparison catalog from the SWIRE (Surace et al. 2004) survey,
trimmed as accurately as possible to the c2d sensitivity limits. As shown by the number
counts versus Wainscoat models of the Galactic background toward Serpens in paper I,
nearly all the sources observed in our survey are likely to be background stars. Because of
the high sensitivity of IRAC channels 1 and 2 relative to both 2MASS and to IRAC channels
3 and 4, most of the more than 200,000 sources extracted from our Serpens dataset do not
have enough spectral coverage for any reliable classification algorithm. In particular, "only"
34,000 sources had enough spectral information from a combination of 2MASS and IRAC
data to permit a test for consistency with a stellar photosphere-plus-extinction model, and
nearly 32,000 of these objects were classified as reddened stellar photospheres. These normal
stellar objects are not considered further in our discussion and are not plotted on the various
color and magnitude diagrams. The details of this classification process and the criteria for
fitting are described in detail by Evans et al. (2007).
In order to pursue the classification process for YSO's beyond that described in Paper
I, we added one more step to the data processing described there. This final step was
"band-filling" the catalog to obtain upper limits or low S/N detections of objects that were
not found in the original source extraction processing. This step is described in detail
in the delivery documentation for the final c2d data delivery (Evans et al. 2007). In short,
though, it involved fixing the position of the source during an extraction at the position of an
existing catalog source and fitting the image data at that fixed position for two parameters,
a background level and source flux, assuming it was a point source. For this processing step,
the fluxes of all the originally extracted sources were subtracted from the image first. In the
case of the data discussed in this paper, the most important contribution of this band-filling
step is to give us flux estimates for the YSO candidates and extra-galactic candidates at
24μm. Because our knowledge of the true PSF is imperfect and because the 24μm PSF is
so much larger than the IRAC ones, it was also necessary to examine these results carefully
to be sure a band-filled 24μm flux was not simply the poorly subtracted wings of a nearby
bright source that, in fact, completely masked the source being band-filled. For the purposes
of this paper, all upper limits are given as 5σ values.
Three of the sources eventually selected as YSO's by the process described below had
24μm fluxes that were obviously saturated. These are the objects in Table 2 numbered 127,
137, and 182. For these three objects we derived the 24μm flux from a fit to the wings of the
source profiles, rather than a fit to the whole profile as is done by the standard c2d source
extraction.

–7–
3.1.

Constructing a Control Catalog from Deep Extragalactic SWIRE
Observations

We use the IRAC and MIPS images of the ELAIS N1 field obtained by the SWIRE team
as a control field for understanding the extragalactic population with colors that mimic those
of YSOs present in our Serpens field. This SWIRE field, expected to contain no extinction
from a molecular cloud and no YSOs, has coverage by both IRAC and MIPS of 5.31 deg2
and has a limiting flux roughly a factor of four below that of our observations of Serpens.
The analysis described below is designed to produce a resampled version of the SWIRE field
as it would have been observed with the typical c2d sensitivity and as if it were located
behind a molecular cloud with the range of extinctions observed in Serpens. The process of
simulating these effects is discussed in detail in the final c2d data delivery documentation
(Evans et al. 2007), but the steps are summarized here.
To avoid effects that may result from differences in data processing, the BCD images for
this SWIRE field were processed by our pipeline in exactly the same way as our own observations. Once a bandmerged catalog of SWIRE sources was constructed, we first simulated
the reddening of sources that would occur if Serpens had been in the foreground of this field.
This reddening was accomplished by randomly applying extinction to each SWIRE source
according to the extinction profile of Serpens, shown in Figure 2. For example, ∼23% of
SWIRE sources were randomly selected and visual extinctions in the range 6.5 ≤ AV < 7.5
were applied, ∼19% of sources were extincted by extinctions in the range 7.5 ≤ AV < 8.5,
and so forth. The extinctions were applied to each of the infrared bands according to the
extinction law appropriate for molecular clouds and cores (Huard et al., in prep.).
Second, we degraded the sensitivity of the reddened SWIRE photometry to match that
of our Serpens observations. This was accomplished by matching the detection rates as a
function of magnitude in each of the bands. The 90% completeness limits of the Serpens
observations are approximately 16.6, 15.6, 15.0, 16.6, 16.2, 15.2, 13.4, and 9.6 mag at J, H,
K, [3.6], [4.5], [5.8], [8.0], and [24], respectively. Thus, for each band, all reddened SWIRE
sources brighter than the completeness limit in Serpens would be detectable by c2d-like
observations and are identified as such in the resampled SWIRE catalog. Most, but not all,
sources fainter than the completeness limit will not be detected by c2d-like observations. We
randomly select which sources to identify as detections, in a given band, in such as way as to
reproduce the empirically determined shape of the completeness function. This resampling
process is performed for each band, resulting in those sources fainter than the completeness
limits in some bands being detected or not detected with the same probabilities as those for
similar sources in Serpens. The photometric uncertainties of all sources in the resampled
catalog of reddened SWIRE sources are re-assigned uncertainties similar to those of Serpens

–8–
sources with similar magnitudes.
Finally, each source in the resampled SWIRE catalog is re-classified, based on its degraded photometry, e.g. "star", "YSOc", "GALc", .... The magnitudes, colors, and classifications of sources in this resampled SWIRE catalog are then directly comparable to those
in our Serpens catalog and may be used to estimate the population of extragalactic sources
satisfying various color and magnitude criteria. At this level of the classification, the terms
YSOc and GALc imply candidate classification status.

3.2.

Classification Based on Color and Magnitude

In Paper I we described a simple set of criteria that basically categorized all objects that
were faint and red in several combinations of IRAC and MIPS colors as likely to be galaxies
(after removal of normal reddened stars). In our new classification we have extended this
concept to include the color and magnitude spaces in Figure 3 together with several additional
criteria to compute a proxy for the probability that a source is a YSO or a background galaxy.
Figure 3 shows a collection of three color-magnitude diagrams and one color-color diagram
used to classify the sources found in our 3.6 to 70μm survey of the Serpens Cloud that
had S/N ≥ 3 in all the Spitzer bands between 3 and 24μm and that were not classified as
reddened stellar photospheres. In addition to the Serpens sources shown in the left panels,
the comparable set of sources from the full-sensitivity SWIRE catalog are shown in the
center panels, and the sources remaining in the extincted/sensitivity-resampled version of
the SWIRE catalog described above are shown in the right panels. The exact details of
our classification scheme are described in Appendix A. Basically we form the product of
individual probabilities from each of the three color-magnitude diagrams in Figure 3 and
then use additional factors to modify that total "probability" based on source properties
such as: its K - [4.5] color, whether it was found to be extended in either of the shorter
IRAC bands, and whether its flux density is above or below some empirically determined
limits in several critical bands. Table 1 summarizes the criteria used for this class separation.
The cutoffs in each of the color-magnitude diagrams and the final probability threshold to
separate YSO's from extragalactic objects were chosen: (1) to provide a nearly complete
elimination of all SWIRE objects from the YSO class, and (2) to maximize the number
of YSO's selected in Serpens consistent with visual inspection of the images to eliminate
obvious extragalactic objects (such as a previously uncatalogued obvious spiral galaxy at
RA = 18h 29m 57.4s , Dec = +00◦ 31' 41" J2000 ).
The cutoffs in color-magnitude space were constructed as smooth, exponentially decaying probabilities around the dashed lines in each of the three diagrams. Sources far

–9–

Fig. 2.- The distribution of visual extinctions found toward the roughly 50,000 sources
classified as stars in our Serpens observations.

– 10 –
below the lines were assigned a high probability of being extra-galactic contamination with
a smoothly decreasing probability to low levels well above the lines. In the case of the [24]
versus [8.0]-[24] relation, the probability dropped off radially away from the center of the
elliptical segment shown in the figure. After inclusion of these three color-magnitude criteria,
we added the additional criteria listed in Table 1. These included: (1) a factor dependent
on the K - [4.5] color, P rob/(K − [4.5]), to reflect the higher probability of a source being an
extra-galactic (GALc) contaminant if it is bluer in that color, (2) a higher GALc probability
for sources that are extended at either 3.6 or 4.8μm where our survey had the best sensitivity
and highest spatial resolution, (3) a decrease in GALc probability for sources with a 70μm
flux density above 400 mJy, empirically determined from examination of the SWIRE data,
and (4) identification as "extragalactic" for any source fainter than [24] = 10.0. Again, we
emphasize that these criteria are based only on the empirical approach of trying to characterize the SWIRE population in color-magnitude space as precisely as possible, not on any
kind of modeling of the energy distributions.
Figure 4 graphically shows the division between YSO's and likely extragalactic contaminants. The number counts versus our "probability" are shown for both the Serpens cloud
and for the resampled SWIRE catalog (normalized to the Serpens area). This illustrates
how cleanly the objects in the SWIRE catalog are identified by this probability criterion.
In the Serpens sample there are clearly two well-separated groups of objects plus a tail of
intermediate probability objects that we have mostly classified as YSO's since no such tail
is apparent in the SWIRE sample.
Our choice of the exact cut between "YSO" and "XGal" in Figure 4 is somewhat arbitrary because of the low level tail of objects in Serpens in the area of log(probability) ∼
-1.5. Since the area of sky included in our SWIRE sample is more than six times as large
as the mapped area of Serpens, we chose our final "probability" cut, log(P ) ≤ −1.47, to
allow two objects from the full (not resampled) SWIRE catalog into the "YSO" classification bin. Thus, aside from the vagaries of small-number statistics, we expect of order 0 – 1
extragalactic interlopers in our list of Serpens YSO's. The right panels in Figure 3, which
use the resampled version of the SWIRE catalog, show that the effects of sensitivity and,
especially, the extinction in Serpens make our cutoff limits particularly conservative in terms
of likelihood of misclassification. We examined all the YSO candidates chosen with these
criteria both in terms of the quality of the photometry and their appearance in the images.
A significant number, ∼ 50 candidates were discarded because of the poor quality of the
bandfilling process at 24μm due to contamination by a nearby brighter source or because
of their appearance in the images. It is possible that a small number of these discarded
candidates are, in fact, true YSO's in the Serpens Cloud. We also manually classified one
source as "YSO" (# 75 in Table 2) that may be the exciting source for an HH-like outflow in

– 11 –
Cluster B (see also discussion of this region by Harvey et al. (2007)), but which was not so
classified because of its extended structure in the IRAC bands. Table 2 lists the 235 YSO's
that resulted from this selection process.
Another test of the success of our separation of background contaminants is to simply
plot the locations of the YSO's and likely galaxies on the sky. Figure 5 shows such a plot
in addition to a plot of visual extinction discussed later. There is clearly a very uniform
distribution of background contaminants and a quite clustered distribution of YSO's (see
further discussion in §7).
There is one additional kind of contaminant that is likely to appear in our data at a
relatively low level, AGB stars. The ISO observations by, for example, van Loon et al. (1999)
and Trams et al. (1999) show that the range of brightnesses of AGB stars in the LMC covers a
span equivalent roughly to 8 < [8.0] < 12, with colors generally equivalent to [4.5]−[8.0] < 1.
Very compact proto-planetary nebulae are generally redder, but even brighter at 8μm (see
e.g. Hora et al. 1996). For typical galactic AGB stars, between 5 and 15 kpc from the sun,
this would imply 3 < [8.0] < 9. The off-cloud fields (when normalized to the same area as
the Serpens data) provide the best handle on the degree of contamination from AGB stars;
in Paper I we saw one object classified as a YSO candidate in the off-cloud panel of Figure 9
with [8.0] < 9. Therefore, based on the ratio of areas mapped in Serpens versus the off-cloud
observations, we expect the number of AGB stars contaminating the YSO candidate list in
the Serpens cloud to be of order a half dozen. As a further check, we have examined the
entire set of off-cloud fields for such objects. In this combined area of 0.58 deg2 , there are
only 3 such YSO candidates. Finally, Merı́n et al. (2007) have classified four AGB stars by
their Spitzer-IRS spectra in the Serpens cloud; these are identified in the diagrams of Figure
3 by black open diamonds and obviously are not included in our final list of high-probability
YSO's. Statistically then, it is possible that a couple of our brightest YSO's are in fact AGB
stars. In fact, Merı́n et al. (2007) have obtained modest S/N optical spectra of a number of
our YSO's. They find five objects whose estimated extinction seems inconsistent with their
location in the Serpens cloud and which suggests they might be background objects at much
larger distances with modest circumstellar shells like AGB stars. We have indicated these
five objects in Table 2 with a footnote "b".
It is also interesting to ask the reverse question, to what extent have our criteria successfully selected objects that were known YSO's from previous observations. Alcalá et al.
(2007) have used the same criteria to search for YSO's in the c2d data for Chamaeleon
II. They conclude that all but one of the known YSO's in that region are identified. In
§5 we discuss the comparison of our results with several previous studies of Serpens that
searched for YSO's. Our survey found counterparts to all the previously known objects in

– 12 –

Fig. 3.- Color-magnitude and color-color diagrams for the Serpens Cloud (left), full SWIRE
(center), and trimmed SWIRE regions. The black dashed lines show the "fuzzy" colormagnitude cuts that define the YSO candidate criterion in the various color-magnitude
spaces. The red dashed lines show hard limits, fainter than which objects are excluded from
the YSO category.

– 13 –

Fig. 4.- Plot of the number of sources versus probability (of being a background contaminant) for the Serpens cloud and for the trimmed SWIRE catalog described in the text. The
vertical dashed line shows the separation chosen for YSO's versus extra-galactic candidates.
For both samples, only sources with detections in all four IRAC bands are plotted to keep
the number counts of contaminants on scale!

– 14 –

Fig. 5.- Left panel: image of the entire mapped area of Serpens at 8.0μm with the positions
of YSO's plotted with circles and likely extra-galactic background contaminants with asterisks; center panel: same image with YSO's of luminosity L < 2 × 10−2 L⊙ plotted with boxes,
and higher luminosity YSO's plotted with circles; right panel: contours of visual extinction
Av at levels of 5, 10, 20, 30 magnitudes as derived from fitting the energy distributions of
sources that were well-fit as reddened stellar photospheres in our data set.

– 15 –
our observed area that had S/N > 5 in those studies, but we did not classify many of them
as YSO's because of the lack of significant excess in the IRAC or MIPS bands. Most of
these were indeed suggested only as candidate YSO's by the authors, so we do not consider
this fact to be a problem for our selection criteria. We again emphasize the fact that our
selection criteria for youth are based solely on the presence of an infrared excess at some
Spitzer wavelength.
The total number of objects classified as YSO's in the IRAC/MIPS overlap area of the
Serpens cloud is 235. From the statistics of our classification of the SWIRE data we expect
of order 1 ± 1 of these are likely to be galaxies. On the other hand, as we discuss in §6,
some of the faint red objects in Figure 3 (below the dashed line) may also be young substellar objects. For example, we note the case of the young brown dwarf BD-Ser 1 found by
Lodieu et al. (2002) that was not selected by our criteria because of its relative faintness. Of
these 235, 198 were detected in at least the H and Ks bands of the 2MASS survey at better
than 7σ. The number of YSO's in each of the four classes of the system suggested by Lada
(1987) and extended by Greene et al. (1994) is: 39 Class I, 25 Class "Flat", 132 Class II,
and 39 Class III, using the flux densities available between 1 and 24μm. Because we require
some infrared excess to be identified as a YSO, the Class III candidates were necessarily
selected by some measurable excess typically at the longer wavelengths, 8 or 24μm. An
obvious corollary is that objects identified as young on the basis of other indicators, e.g.
X-ray emission, lithium abundance, but without excesses in the range of 1 – 24μm are not
selected with our criteria.

3.3.

YSO's Selected By MIPS

Harvey et al. (2007) found 250 YSO candidates in the entire area mapped by MIPS
at 24μm in Serpens, an area of 1.8 deg2 ; 51 of these are outside the IRAC/MIPS overlap
area and are listed in Table 3. We can make a comparison of those statistics with the YSO
counts here in two ways. First in the area covered by both IRAC and MIPS24 there are
197 objects that satisfy the criteria of Harvey et al. (2007), i.e., Ks < 14, Ks − [24] > 2,
[24] < 10 and 24μm S/N ≥ 5. Of these, 184 satisfy our more restrictive criteria in this study
based on the combination of 2MASS, IRAC, and MIPS data, or 93%. We would classify the
other 13 as likely background galaxies. Secondly, of the 235 YSO's found in this study, 200
have sufficient data to be classifiable by the "mips only" criteria above, but only 167 or 84%
actually meet the mips-only YSO criteria. In other words, 33 objects have been classified
as high quality YSO's in this paper in the MIPS/IRAC overlap region that did not meet
the criteria based only on MIPS and 2MASS data. If these ratios can be extrapolated to

– 16 –
the larger area covered only by MIPS, then we would expect Harvey et al. (2007) to have
missed 16% (8 or 9) of the YSO's but to have included 7% (3 or 4) that would not meet
our combined IRAC/MIPS criteria. With these corrections we might have expected to find
235 + 56 = 291 YSO's in the entire 1.8 deg2 area covered by MIPS if we had matching IRAC
observations. Finally, in light of our earlier discussion of AGB contaminants, it is possible
that 6 – 9 of these YSO's would actually be found to be background AGB stars.

4.

Search for Variability

The fact that our data were taken in two epochs separated by 6 hours or more gives
us the opportunity to search for variability over that time scale. Rebull et al. (2006) and
Harvey et al. (2007) have performed similar tests for variability of the 24μm emission from
sources in the c2d observations of Perseus and Serpens and found no reliable evidence for
variability at that wavelength. There is, however, substantial evidence for short term variability in the near-infrared for YSO's. We, therefore, performed a similar investigation in
the two shortest IRAC bands, 3.6 and 4.5μm. No clear evidence was found at the level of ±
25% for any sources in the field over the 6-hour time scale of our multi-epoch observations.

5.

Comparison with Previous Studies of Serpens

We have cross-correlated our source catalog with those from previous studies of Serpens
that searched for YSO's. We chose three studies that covered much of Cluster A at both nearIR, ISO, and X-ray wavelengths (Eiroa & Casali 1992; Kaas et al. 2004; Preibisch 2003), and
one recent ISO study of Cluster B (Djupvik et al. 2006). Table 4 lists the sources from each
of these previous studies and the best-matching Spitzer source from our complete catalog.
In brief, we find good matches for essentially all the previous IR-selected YSO's that had
S/N > 4 in the earlier studies and which were included in our mapped area. In detail,
however, a number of YSO candidates from the earlier studies were not classified as YSO's
in our study. The reasons for this are different for the various catalogs. From the X-ray
catalog of Preibisch (Preibisch 2003) in Cluster A, we only identified 17 of the 45 X-ray
sources as YSO's on the basis of their infrared excesses. The X-ray sources that were not
identified as YSO's included both many objects that were well-fitted as reddened stellar
photospheres (21 sources) and objects with some likely infrared excess but too little to fit
our criteria aimed at eliminating extra-galactic interlopers. The situation with the infrared
catalogs is somewhat different. Examining our non-matches from the ground-based study of
Eiroa & Casali (1992), we find that a large fraction of their YSO's are classified as such by

– 17 –
our criteria, but not all. From the ISO surveys (Kaas et al. 2004; Djupvik et al. 2006) we
typically identify ∼50–60% as YSO's. The ones that we do not classify as such are typically
those with low S/N in the ISO observations or where the amount of infrared excess was not
large enough to satisfy our test of whether the object could not be fitted as an extincted
stellar photosphere as described by Evans et al. (2007).

6.
6.1.

Luminosities

The YSO Luminosity Function in Serpens

One of the most important physical parameters for any star is its mass. For premain-sequence stars this is problematic, because the determination of mass depends on the
placement of the star on an HR diagram and the use of model evolutionary tracks for which
there is significant uncertainty at the level of at least a factor of 1.5 – 2 in the literature
(Hillenbrand & White 2004; Stassun et al. 2004). For young stars in a cluster, a poor, but
still useful proxy for mass is the stellar luminosity since it is possible that most of the stars
have formed more or less simultaneously. With all these caveats in mind, we display in Figure
6 the histogram of total luminosities for the 235 YSO's found in Serpens in our survey with
the assumed distance of 260 pc. We remind the reader that these objects were selected
specifically on the basis of infrared excess emission, so this list is limited to YSO's that show
substantial IR excess at least somewhere in the range of 3.5 - 70μm. For example, as we
discussed in §5, a comparison of our list of YSO's with the list of X-ray sources in Cluster A
(Preibisch 2003) showed that more than half the X-ray sources were not classified as YSO's
by our infrared excess criteria. In some sense then, it is likely that the IR-selected and xray-selected samples are complementary in selecting less-evolved and more-evolved samples
of YSO's respectively. The luminosity function of our IR-excess-defined YSO sample peaks
at roughly 2 × 10−2 L⊙ and drops off steeply below 10−2 L⊙ . This is interestingly equal
to the luminosity of objects at the hydrogen-burning limit of 0.075 M⊙ in the models of
Baraffe et al. (2002), for objects with ages of ∼2 Myr, a common estimate for the age of the
Serpens star forming event (Kaas et al. 2004; Djupvik et al. 2006). Of course an important
question to ask is to what extent this luminosity distribution in Figure 6 is influenced by
selection effects.
We can estimate the selection effects in our sample from the statistics in the SWIRE
samples discussed above. The completeness limits of the full catalog are nearly 2 magnitudes
fainter than the trimmed version, so we assume for simplicity that the full catalog is 100%
complete down to the faintest magnitudes of interest for this test in the c2d Serpens data
set. Figure 7 shows the number counts as a function of "luminosity" (all sources assumed

– 18 –
to be at 260 pc) for three versions of our c2d-processed SWIRE catalog: 1) the full-depth
catalog, 2) the catalog cut-off with c2d sensitivity limits but without added extinction, and
3) the catalog corrected for both c2d sensitivity levels and extinction in the Serpens cloud.
The ratio of the second to the first version serves as a good proxy for a completeness function
since it includes the effects of c2d sensitivity only. The lower panel of Figure 7 then shows
this ratio as our estimate of the completeness function at the range of luminosities of Serpens
YSO's observed in Figure 6. In Figure 6, then, we also indicate how the YSO luminosity
function might be adjusted to account for this estimate of our survey completeness (with an
assumed completeness of 100% at the bright end). Although substantial adjustments must
be made to the number counts at fainter luminosities, the general conclusion remains intact
that the luminosity function peaks around f ew × 10−2 L⊙ and drops to both lower and
higher luminosities. Interestingly, if our completeness estimates are valid, there may still be
a substantial population of IR excess sources down to luminosities of 10−3 L⊙ as was already
suggested in Paper I. For example, as noted earlier in §3.2, the young brown dwarf found by
Lodieu et al. (2002) was not selected as a YSO with our criteria because it was faint enough
that its colors placed it into the color and magnitude ranges where extra-galactic objects
begin to be prominent.

6.2.

The Lowest Luminosity Sources

There are 37 YSO's with total luminosities (1 – 70μm) less than 2 × 10−2 L⊙ , without
any correction for selection effects in either our observations or our selection criteria. Figure
5 presented in §3.2 shows the spatial distribution of the low (L < 2 × 10−2 L⊙ ) and "high"
(L > 2 × 10−2 L⊙ ) luminosity YSO's in Serpens. There does not appear to be any significant
difference between these two distributions. Likewise Figure 8 shows the distribution of spectral slopes, α, for the low luminosity sample relative to two higher luminosity samples, and
Table 5 lists the average and standard deviation for the spectral slopes for three luminosity samples. Again, there is no obvious difference in the distributions within the statistical
uncertainties of the samples. (See also discussion in §8.1). These two facts suggest that
the mechanisms and timing of formation of these two luminosity groups may not be very
different. Finally, Figure 9 shows the distribution of extinction for stars nearby each YSO.
For this analysis we selected all objects within 80" of each YSO that were classified as "star"
by the process described earlier. We averaged the fitted extinction values for these stars;
the number of stars contributing to the average ranged from 5 to 48. This figure shows that
the lower luminosity YSO's have at least as much typical extinction as the higher luminosity ones, a fact that would be unlikely if they were mis-classified background extragalactic
objects.

– 19 –

Fig. 6.- Luminosity function for Serpens YSO's (solid) and estimate of correction for
completeness effects (dashed).

– 20 –

Fig. 7.- Upper panel – number counts for the full SWIRE catalog as processed through
the c2d pipeline for objects detected in all four IRAC bands versus those for the "trimmed"
version of the catalog with completeness limits for each individual band comparable to those
for c2d. Lower panel – the ratio of the two number counts, i.e. completeness factor.

– 21 –

Fig. 8.- Histogram of distribution of spectral slopes, "alpha", for three luminosity "classes"
of YSO's.

– 22 –

Fig. 9.- Histogram of distribution of average extinction for stars within 80" of each YSO
for "high" and "low" luminosity YSO's (above or below 2 × 10−2 L⊙ ).

– 23 –
7.

Spatial Distribution of Star Formation

We have already noted in §1 that the Serpens star-forming region has been identified
as one displaying strong evidence of clustering of the youngest objects. We also showed
in Figure 5 that the spatial distribution of our high quality YSO candidates was highly
clustered. A number of authors have attempted to quantify the degree of clustering as
a function of spatial scale using the two-point correlation function (Johnstone et al. 2000;
Enoch et al. 2006; Simon 1995; Gomez & Lada 1998; Bate, Clarke & McCaughrean 1998).
Typical results have found a steep slope, γ ∝ d−2 on small spatial scales implying a rapid
decrease in clustering on scales out to ∼ 10000 AU, and a substantially shallower slope,
γ ∝ d−0.5 beyond that (Simon 1995; Gomez & Lada 1998). Figure 10 shows the two-point
correlation function, W, for the YSO's in our Serpens catalog and the sample of objects
classified as extra-galactic background sources. The Serpens samples are divided into two
groups, those with spectral slopes, α, that place them in the Class I or "Flat" categories
of Greene et al. (1994), and those whose slopes imply Class II or III. Although our range
of good sampling only extends down to ∼ 1000 AU, equivalent to 4", our data suggest
that the slope for separations under 104 AU is of order 0.5, and drops steeply for the more
embedded and likely youngest Class I and Flat-SED objects beyond 104 AU. The nominally
more evolved objects in Class II and III, exhibit a lower level of clustering and more uniform
slope in the two-point correlation function. These results are consistent with the appearance
of the source distributions as shown, for example, in Figure 13 of Paper I. As shown in
Figure 10, the slope and magnitude of the correlation for our sample of background extragalactic objects is consistent with that found by, for example, Maddox et al. (1990) for a
bright sample of galaxies.
The total surface density of young stellar objects in a cluster is an indicator of the
richness of star formation in the cluster. Allen et al. (2006) have computed surface densities
for YSO's identified by infrared excess in a sample of 10 young clusters. They find typical
peak surface densities of 500 – 1000 pc−2 and average values of order 100 – 200 pc−2 . The
peak surface density in Cluster A of our YSO's identified by IR excess is comparable to these,
of order 103 pc−2 , and a factor of about two less in Cluster B. The average values are about a
factor of 4 less than the peak in both clusters. In particular, if we define the cluster edges by
the Av = 20 contour for comparison with other c2d clusters, we obtain the values in Table 6
for the number of stars per solid angle and per square parsec. We have compared the values
for clusters A and B with those for the rest of the cloud and for the total cloud surveyed.
The surface densities of YSOs are 10 to 20 times higher in the clusters as in the rest of the
cloud. As shown by Allen et al. (2006), Cluster A in Serpens is particularly striking in terms
of the contrast between the peak surface density and how quickly, within 1 pc, the density
drops to very low values, ∼ f ew × pc−2 . In terms of volume density, though, even Cluster

– 24 –
A has a substantially lower volume density of star formation than such rich clusters as the
Trapezium (5000 pc−3 ) or Mon R2 (9000 pc−3 ) (Elmegreen et al. 2000).
Figure 5 also shows the spatial distribution of visual extinction in the cloud as derived
from our data. These extinction values were derived from the combination of 2MASS and
Spitzer data for sources that were well fit as reddened stellar photospheres as described in
detail by Evans et al. (2007). As already noted in our previous studies of the IRAC data
alone (Harvey et. al. 2006) and the MIPS data alone (Harvey et al. 2007), there is clearly
a striking correspondence between the areas of high extinction and the densest clusters of
YSO's, particularly those containing Class I and Class Flat sources.

8.

Disk Properties

The properties of the circumstellar dust surrounding young stars can be estimated from
the overall energy distributions of the objects in a variety of ways. These properties include:
the overall amount of dust, the density distribution as a function of radial distance from
the central star, the morphology of the circumstellar disks which probably represent the
configuration of many of these circumstellar distributions, and to some extent, the degree
of evolution of the dust from typical interstellar dust to larger and more chemically evolved
grains likely to represent some stage in the formation of planetary systems. We discuss
several approaches to classifying the dust emission in this section, beginning with the use of
infrared colors.

8.1.

Color-color diagrams

Numerous authors have shown how combinations of colors in the infrared can provide
significant diagnostic information on the configuration and total amount of circumstellar
material around young stars. Whitney et al. (2003) modelled a wide range of disk and
envelope configurations and computed their appearance in a number of infrared color-color
and color-magnitude diagrams particularly relevant to Spitzer's wavelength range. Similarly
Allen et al. (2004) have published IRAC color-color diagrams for another set of models of
objects with circumstellar disks and/or envelopes. Recently, Robitaille et al. (2007) have
computed a very large grid of models to extend the predictions from those of Whitney et al.
(2003) to a much larger parameter space. Observationally, Lada et al. (2006) have used
IRAC and MIPS colors from Spitzer observations to classify the optical thickness of disks
around pre-main-sequence stars in IC 348, using the terms "anemic disks" and "thick disks"

– 25 –

Fig. 10.- Left panel: the two-point correlation function, W, for Serpens. The dotted
histogram is for sources identified as Class I and "Flat" SED objects, i.e. α ≥ −0.3. The
solid histogram is for the Class II/III objects, i.e. α < −0.3. The dashed lines show several
possible power law slopes for the portions of the YSO curves. Right panel: the dashed
histogram is for the objects classified as likely background galaxies with S/N > 7 in all four
IRAC bands. The dash-dot line shows the slope and amplitude found by Maddox et al.
(1990) for the bright end of the extra-galactic population, which is a quite good fit to our
estimate of the background contamination in our sample.

– 26 –
to point to objects roughly in the Class III and Class II portions of the ubiquitous "Class
System" (Lada 1987; Greene et al. 1994).
Figure 11 shows three color-color diagrams and one color-magnitude diagram for the
235 Serpens YSO's compared to the density of models from Robitaille et al. (2007) for a
model cluster at the distance of Serpens with brightnesses limited to those appropriate for
our sensitivity levels. For two of the diagrams the figure also indicates the approximate
areas where most of the models fall for the three physical stages, I, II, and III, described
by Robitaille et al. (2007) that roughly correspond to the observational "classes" I+Flat,
II, and III. These diagrams display, first of all, that YSO's come in a wide range of colors
and brightnesses; large areas of all the diagrams are occupied. In a general way we find
objects located in these diagrams where the models of Whitney et al. (2003), Allen et al.
(2004), and Robitaille et al. (2007) would predict for pre-main-sequence stars with a range
of evolutionary states as well as general agreement with the locations of young objects found
in IC348 by Lada et al. (2006). For example, consistent with our finding in paper I that the
bulk of the YSO's are class II objects, we see a strong concentration in the area around [5.8][8.0]= 0.8, [3.6]-[4.5]=0.5 where both Allen et al. and Whitney et al. predict such sources
should be located. Additionally, there is structure in the [8.0] vs. [3.6]-[8.0] color magnitude
diagram for the distribution of Serpens YSO's that is also evident in the density of models
of Robitaille et al. (2007). There are, however, some interesting differences. The "Stage II"
area from Robitaille et al. (2007) includes a smaller fraction of our nominal Class II objects
than might be expected. There is also a larger number of very red objects in several of the
diagrams than is predicted by the density of models in those areas, considering that the
faintest grey levels correspond to a probability equal to 10−4 of the maximum probability.
Some of this may be due to effects of reddening, but it suggests that the models may also
need some refinement, despite their rough agreement with the distribution of observed colors.
These data can also be examined to see if there is any correlation between luminosity
and infrared excess, e.g. the [8.0] vs. [3.6]-[8.0] color magnitude diagram. For example, if
higher luminosity young objects had higher levels of multiplicity (e.g. Lada 2006), then it is
possible this would be manifested in less massive disks with perhaps large inner holes. Figure
11 shows no such correlation; in fact, if anything there appears to be a lack of relatively blue
colors for the brightest objects. Figure 8 that displays the distribution of spectral slopes and
the accompanying Table 5 also show no measurable effect within the scatter for a dependence
of spectral slope on luminosity.

– 27 –

Fig. 11.- Color-color and color-magnitude plots of the 235 Serpens YSO's compared with
the distributions from models of Robitaille et al. (2007). The symbols are for the three
different luminosity groups discussed in the text: open diamonds, L > 1 L⊙ ; light filled
circles, 0.02 L⊙ < L < 1 L⊙ ; plus signs, L < 0.02 L⊙ . The model data were those for their
model cluster, with a distance of 260 pc for Serpens and with the c2d completeness limits.
Also shown are the rough areas from Robitaille et al. (2007) occupied by mainly stage I, II,
and III models.

– 28 –
8.2.

Spectral Energy Distribution Modeling

In order to go beyond the general conclusions possible from color-color and colormagnitude plots, we have modelled the large fraction of our sources for which enough data
are available to characterize them as likely star-plus-disk objects. For this analysis we have
selected all Class II and Class III YSO's. We expect these objects to have a reddened photosphere plus an infrared excess coming from the circumstellar material, most likely in a disk
configuration. For completeness we show, without modeling, the SED's of the remaining
YSO's. Figures 12 to 20 show the SEDs of all Class I, Class Flat, Class II and Class III
sources. The open dots are the observed fluxes and generally include 2MASS J, H, and
K fluxes followed by the four IRAC fluxes at 3.6, 4.5, 5.8 and 8.0 μm and by the MIPS
fluxes at 24 and 70 μm when available. For the Class IIs and IIIs, we characterize the
emission from the disk by comparing the energy distribution with that of a low-mass star.
For this, we have computed the extinction from the J-K colors assuming a K7 underlying
star, and then we have dereddened the observed fluxes with the interstellar extinction law
of Weingartner & Draine (2001) with Rv = 5.5 to fit the dereddened SEDs to a NEXTGEN
(Hauschildt et al. 1999) model of a K7 stellar photosphere. In the plots, the filled dots are
the dereddened fluxes and the grey line is the photospheric emission from the star. Each
SED is labeled with the identification number in Table 2. The parameters of the model fits
are listed in Tables 7 and 8.
Two main assumptions are used in this approach. The first is that the star is a low-mass
star; this is reasonable given the fact that the luminosity function discussed earlier peaks at
L ∼ f ew × 10−2 L⊙ . In addition, Oliveira et al. (2007) have found that 30 of the 39 YSO's
they observed out of our sample had spectral types of K or M. The second assumption is
that there is no substantial excess in the near infrared bands, where we consider all flux to
be photospheric. This assumption is obviously only correct for those stars in the sample
without strong on-going disk accretion. Cieza et al. (2005) have demonstrated that nearIR excesses as short as J-band can be seen in some actively accreting T Tauri stars, and
they give an observed range of J-band excesses of 0.1 – 1.0 mag for their sample of sources
in Taurus. The effect of this excess on the computed parameters implies that the stellar
luminosities for the Class II objects are upper limits and therefore the disk luminosities are
lower limits. More specifically, neglecting an excess flux in the J-band of 1.1 magnitude in
one object would reduce its Ldisk/Lstar ratio by 12 % and modify the disk emission SED,
diminishing its excess mostly at the shorter wavelengths. That would only happen, however,
to the fraction of objects that are strongly accreting. Oliveira et al. (2007) found strong
H-α emission indicative of active accretion in only 12 out of 39 Serpens YSO's observed. We
ran a test removing these objects from the final statistics and this did not change the overall
picture.

– 29 –
The dashed line in the SED plots is the median SED of T Tauri stars in Taurus
(Hartmann et al. 2005) normalized to the dereddened J-band flux of our SEDs. It represents the typical SED of an optically thick accreting disk around a Classical T Tauri star
and is shown here to allow a qualitative estimation of the presence of disk evolution and
dust settling. Based on similarity to this median SED, we define as T an SED which is
identical to it, within the errors, as L, an SED with lower fluxes at some wavelengths, and H
an object with larger fluxes than the median T Tauri SED. We have labeled the objects with
these codes and use them to interpret the state of disk evolution. We interpret the L-type
objects as thin disks which could perhaps result from dust grain growth and settling to the
mid-plane, similar to the "anemic disks" in Lada et al. (2006). Objects 3 and 5 are good
examples of T-type objects, numbers 11 and 18 are L-type stars, and number 8 is a H-type
object. Also, we have labeled as LU objects that have photospheric fluxes up to around 8μm
but then a sudden jump at longer wavelengths to the levels of a T-Tauri disk. We believe
these objects may have large inner holes in their still optically thick disks; number 19 is one
example of these.
Out of the 171 sources in the sample that are Class II or Class III, 44 (26 %) are Ttype, so equivalent to a classical T Tauri star, 125 (73 %) are L-type, so show evidence
of some degree of disk evolution, and finally 2 (1 %) show larger fluxes than the median
SED of Taurus. This latter category is generally the result of imperfect fitting to the stellar
photosphere due to lack of near-IR data and will not be considered further.
The numbers above indicate that there are many young stars in Serpens with disks
that are virtually identical to those in Taurus. This points to a very similar origin of the
disk structure across star forming regions. Within the uncertainties in our modeling process
discussed above, however, we see a majority of L-type objects (73 %) in Serpens. This
suggests that the disks in Serpens may be generally more evolved or flattened that those in
Taurus. Also, interestingly the number of LU-type objects, or those with large inner holes,
amounts to 14 (11 % of the L-type objects and only 6 % of the total YSO sample including
Class I and F sources). This very small incidence indicates that either the process producing
these large inner holes is a very fast transitional phase in the disk evolution or that only
a small number of systems undergo that phase. We examine this issue below. In order to
put firmer limits on these numbers it will be necessary to get optical spectral types for the
stars and optical photometry in order to produce more accurate photosphere/disk/extinction
models.
The SEDs also allow a rough study of the disk properties across the surveyed area. For
this purpose we integrated the stellar and total fluxes to calculate a ratio between the stellar
and the disk fluxes. The corresponding distribution is shown in Figure 21. Again, the solid

– 30 –
line is the whole Class II and III sample and the dotted line corresponds to the T-type SEDs.
To guide the eye, we have marked the approximate regimes of these ratios measured in debris
disks (Ldisk/Lstar < 0.02), passive disks (0.02 < Ldisk/Lstar < 0.08 Kenyon & Hartmann
1987), and accretion disks (Ldisk/Lstar > 0.1), respectively. The figure illustrates well the
large variety of disk evolutionary phases that we observe in Serpens, as well as the large
majority of massive, accreting disks in the region.
In order to study the disk evolution in the cloud, there is need for a better characterization of the full sample with optical spectroscopy. That work is in progress and will
be published elsewhere. Here we explore further the shapes of the SEDs to test another
evolutionary diagnostic of the disk status. We have found that the more commonly used
evolutionary metrics, e.g. spectral slope, α, bolometric temperature, Tbol , or the Class system discussed earlier do not seem to capture the full range of phenomena apparent in our
distribution of SED's for young stellar objects. We, therefore, use αexcess and λexcess , two
new second-order SED parameters presented in Cieza et al. (2006) that will be discussed in
more detail in a separate paper. In short, λexcess is the last wavelength where the observed
flux is photospheric and αexcess is the slope computed as dlog(λFλ )/dlog(λ) starting from
λexcess . The first parameter gives us an indication of how close the circumstellar matter is
to the central object and the latter one a measure of how optically thick it is. Given the
assumptions above for the fitting process, our values are upper limits for λexcess , and correspondingly lower limits for αexcess for the Class IIs. We assume good stellar fits for the Class
III sources.
Figure 22 shows both values for a sample of Classical T Tauri stars (CTTs) from
Cieza et al. (2005), weak-lined T Tauri stars (wTTs) from Cieza et al. (2006), debris disks
from Chen et al. (2005), and our sample of YSOs in Serpens. Cieza et al. (2006) found that
λexcess is well correlated with evolutionary phase and also, as seen in Figure 22, that α is
observed over wider ranges for later evolutionary phases. This suggests a large range of
possible evolutionary paths for circumstellar disks. Objects could either evolve to the lower
right side of the diagram, which could be interpreted as a sign of dust grain growth and
settling to the disk mid-plane; they could also move to the right and up, from creation of a
large inner hole in their disks while retaining a massive outer disk, and also, as this diagram
shows, all intermediate pathways in between both extremes.

– 31 –

Fig. 12.- Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class I sources in the sample. The open
dots signal the observed fluxes from J-band to MIPS-70 when available. The label gives the
index in Table 2.

– 32 –

Fig. 13.- Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class I sources in the sample (continued).
Symbols as in Figure 12.

– 33 –

Fig. 14.- Spectral Energy Distributions of the Flat sources in the sample. Symbols as in
Figure 12.

– 34 –

Fig. 15.- Spectral Energy Distributions (SED) of the Class II sources in the sample. The
open and solid dots are the observed and dereddened fluxes respectively. The grey line is
the stellar model of a K7 star and the dashed line is the median SED of the TTauri stars in
Taurus by Hartmann et al. (2005) normalized to the dereddened J-band flux for comparison.
See text for more information.

– 35 –

Fig. 16.- Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class II sources in the sample (continued).

– 36 –

Fig. 17.- Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class II sources in the sample (continued).

– 37 –

Fig. 18.- Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class II sources in the sample (continued).

– 38 –

Fig. 19.- Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class III sources in the sample.

– 39 –

Fig. 20.- Spectral Energy Distributions of the Class III sources in the sample.

– 40 –
9.
9.1.

Selected Sources
The Coldest Objects

Table 9 lists the 15 YSO's that display the coldest energy distributions. These are the
objects whose ratio of F70 /F24 > 8. Six of these are in Cluster A (the core) and four in
Cluster B. Two are in a small grouping about 0.2◦ northeast of Cluster B, and the remaining
three appear as isolated cold objects, though in areas with other moderately red objects.
All of these except for two of the isolated cold objects, ID's 105 and 148, are associated
with dense clumps of millimeter emission as seen by Enoch et al. (2007). As discussed in the
following section, two in Cluster A and one in Cluster B are associated with high velocity
outflows. As has been noted already by Padgett et al. (2004) and Rebull et al. (2006), it is
striking how many of these coldest, most obscured YSO's are located in compact clusters
together with objects that are substantially more evolved in the nominal system of classes,
e.g. Class II and III.

9.2.

Outflow Sources

A number of recent Spitzer studies have found that high-velocity shocked outflows from
young stars are visible in IRAC images, typically strongest at 4.5μm (Noreiga-Crespo et al.
2004). We have examined our images for such outflows as well as for correspondance with the
lists of published HH objects in the region (Ziener & Eisloffel 1999). Table 10 summarizes
the results of this effort. Two strong, obvious jet-like features are seen in Cluster A and
one in Cluster B. In addition, as shown in Table 10, we find small extended features at the
positions of most of the known HH objects in Serpens that were within our covered area. The
two "jets" in Cluster A appear to originate from two of the most deeply embedded objects in
this cluster that are associated with the sub-mm sources SMM1 and SMM5 (Testi & Sargent
1998). Both these outflows are aligned roughly in the NW-SE direction and are visible on
both sides of the central 24μm likely exciting sources. In Cluster B there is one obvious
jet-like feature extending mostly south of YSO # 75. There is also probably faint emission
visible 30′′ to the north of the embedded source as well. Harvey et al. (2007) discuss the
Cluster B jet and several nearby Spitzer sources in more detail. Figures 23 and 24 show
3-color images of Clusters A and B with the color tables chosen to make these jets most
visible. In addition to the optical HH objects in the Serpens Clouds, there are a number
of high-velocity molecular outflows that have been mapped in Cluster A (Davis et al. 1999).
These maps present a confusing picture of outflows, and because of the relatively larger
beamwidth of the mm observations and close packing of infrared sources in this cluster, it is

– 41 –

Fig. 21.- Distribution of disk to star luminosity ratios. The solid and dashed lines are the
total sample and T Tauri-like sample of SEDs, respectively. Also marked are the typical
ranges of Ldisk /Lstar ratios for debris disks, passive irradiated disks and accretion disks. The
figure indicates that objects of all three evolutionary stages are found in Serpens, with a
predominance of young accreting T Tauri-type stars.

– 42 –

Fig. 22.- Distribution of excess slopes αexcess with respect to the wavelength at which the
infrared excess begins λturn−off for the sample of wTTs (solid dots), a sample of cTTs in
Lupus from Cieza et al. (2006), the median SED of cTTs in Taurus from D'Alessio et al.
(1999) in asterisks (marked as D99), and a sample of debris disks from Chen et al. (2005) in
diamonds. The arrows represent the limits for the class II objects in Serpens and the triangles
the Class III sources. The diagram shows a much larger spread in inner disk morphologies
in the more evolved objects than in the least evolved ones. The Serpens objects follow the
previously observed trend.

– 43 –
very difficult to associate the radio outflows unequivocally with particular Spitzer sources.

9.3.

Other Objects

Horrobin, Casali & Eiroa (1997) reported on the disappearance of a bright near-infrared
source in Serpens from the earlier study of EC92. Table 4 shows that we also see no obvious
source at the position of EC92-81, other than a low S/N single-band detection of a source
moderately distant from the nominal position. Interestingly, though, this area marked in
Figure 23 appears to contain several small knots of emission that may represent shocked gas.
For example, there are two small knots visible in our 4.5 and 8.0μm images that have no 3.6
or 24μm counterparts (and therefore not classified as YSO's). These two knots at RA = 18
29 56.7, Dec = +01 13 19 (J2000), are only 12′′ south of the position of EC92-81. Therefore
it is possible that the original source was a small clump of excited gas that has moved or
dissipated since the original study of EC92, and perhaps, these Spitzer knots are related to
that earlier source in some way.

10.

Overall Results on Star Formation

The overall picture of star formation in Serpens is summarized in Table 6. As noted
earlier, the surface density of young stars is much higher in Clusters A and B than in the
rest of the cloud, by factors of 10 to 20. On the other hand, the majority of YSOs (74%)
are not in the clusters, but in the rest of the cloud. If we assume a mean mass for the stars
of 0.5 M⊙ and assume that star formation has been proceeding for 2 Myr, we can estimate
the rate at which the clusters and the whole cloud are converting mass into stars. These
values are also given in Table 6. The Serpens cloud that we have surveyed is turning nearly
60 M⊙ into stars per Myr. The rates for the clusters are probably underestimates because
they are probably younger than 2 Myr, a typical duration for the Class II SED. Of course, a
significant number of the older objects outside the clusters may have, in fact, formed in these
or earlier clusters. A 1 km s−1 random motion of a YSO relative to its birthplace results in
1 pc of movement in 106 yr, or nearly 1/4 degree at the distance of Serpens.
The distribution of YSOs over class supports the younger age for the clusters than for
star formation in general in Serpens. While the ratio of the number of Class I and Flat
spectrum sources to the number of Class II and Class III sources is 0.37 for the whole cloud,
similar to other clouds surveyed by c2d (Evans et al., in prep.), the same ratio is 3.0 for
Cluster A and 1.4 for Cluster B. These high ratios strongly suggest that Cluster A is too

– 44 –

Fig. 23.- Three-color image of the Cluster A area of Serpens. The color coding is:
blue/4.5μm, green/8.0μm, and red/24μm. Some of the more obvious objects that are likely
to be jets are marked by arrows. The region of the disappearing source 81 of Eiroa & Casali
(1992) is circled.

– 45 –

Fig. 24.- Three-color image of the Cluster B area of Serpens as for Figure 23.

– 46 –
young for most YSOs to have reached the Class II stage. In contrast, this ratio is 0.14 for
the rest of the cloud, outside the clusters, which is strongly dominated by Class II and Class
III objects.

11.

Summary

We have identified a high-confidence set of 235 YSO's in Serpens by a set of criteria
based on comparison with data from the Spitzer SWIRE Legacy program. This is a large
enough number that we can draw important statistical conclusions about various properties
of this set. If we assume that the "Class System" of Lada (1987) and Greene et al. (1994)
represents an evolutionary sequence, then the relative numbers of YSO's found in each of
the first three classes (I, flat, and II) suggests that the Class II phase lasts substantially
longer than the combined total of the Class I and "Flat" phases, based on the overall cloud
statistics. The clusters, however, show more YSOs in the Class I and Flat phases than
in Class II, indicating that they are very young. The majority of YSOs (mostly Class II)
are outside the clusters and probably represent a somewhat older epoch of star formation
compared to the intense star formation now going on in the clusters. The surface density of
YSOs in the clusters exceeds that of the rest of the cloud by factors of 10 to 20 (Table 6).
The luminosity function for the Serpens YSO's is populated down to luminosities of
3 × 10−3 L⊙ . It may extend even lower, but our ability to distinguish low luminosity YSO's
is severely restricted by the large population of background galaxies at these flux levels. The
lower luminosity YSO's, L < 2 × 10−2 L⊙ , exhibit a similar spatial distribution and SED
slope distribution to those of their higher luminosity counterparts. This is consistent with
the conclusion that they have formed in similar ways.

12.

Acknowledgments

Support for this work, part of the Spitzer Legacy Science Program, was provided by
NASA through contracts 1224608, 1230782, and 1230779 issued by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under NASA contract 1407. Astrochemistry in
Leiden is supported by a NWO Spinoza grant and a NOVA grant. B.M. thanks the Fundación
Ramón Areces for financial support. This publication makes use of data products from the
Two Micron All Sky Survey, which is a joint project of the University of Massachusetts
and the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center/California Institute of Technology, funded
by NASA and the National Science Foundation. We also acknowledge extensive use of the

– 47 –
SIMBAD data base.

– 48 –
A.

YSO Selection Process

The procedure we use to select YSO's and de-select extra-galactic background sources
is based on the color-magnitude diagrams shown in Figure 3. We construct "probability"
functions for each of the three color-magnitude diagrams based on where a source falls relative
to the black dashed lines in each diagram. These three "probabilities" are multiplied and then
additional adjustments to the probability are made based on several additional properties
of the source fluxes and whether or not they were found to be larger than point-like in the
source extraction process.
In the [4.5] vs. [4.5]-[8.0] color magnitude diagram, the probability function is:
Pi2i4 = 0.7 × {1 − exp(−[1.2 + 0.5(M4.5 − D)]3 )}
where:
D = 13.05 for M4.5 − M8.0 > 1.4
= 14.5 for 0.5 ≥ M4.5 − M8.0 < 1.4 and object was found to be pointlike in all IRAC bands
= 12.5 for 0.5 ≥ M4.5 − M8.0 < 1.4 and object was found to be extended at 3.6 or 4.5μm
= 14.5 for M4.5 − M8.0 < 0.5

In the [24] vs. [8.0]-[24] color magnitude diagram, the probability function is:
Pi4m1 = exp(−{[(M8 − M24 − 3.5)/1.7]2 + [(M24 − 9)/2)2 }
and Pi4−m1 is set to a minimum of 0.1.
In the [24] vs. [4.5]-[8.0] color magnitude diagram, the probability function is:
Pi24m1 = 0.7 × {1 − exp(−[M4.5 − M8 + 0.8 − (10 − M24 )/1.8}
and Pi24m1 is set to a minimum of 0.
The combined "probability" is then:
Ptot = Pi2i4 × Pi4m1 × Pi24m1
Additionally, the following factors influence modifications to Ptot :
Ptot

/ (K − [4.5])

Ptot × 2 for sources that are extended at 3.6 or 4.5μm
Ptot = 0.1 where [24] > 10 (i.e. assumed GALc)
Ptot × 0.1 where F70 > 400 mJy and source detected at 5.8,8, and 24μm

– 49 –
Based on the distribution of Ptot shown in Figure 4, we chose the dividing line between
YSO's and extra-galactic sources to be log10 (Ptot ) = −1.47.

– 50 –

Table 1. YSO vs. X-Gal Discrimination Criteria
Criterion

Contaminant Probability

K - [4.5]
[4.5] (for [4.5]-[8.0] < 0.5)
[4.5] (for 0.5 < [4.5]-[8.0] < 1.4, Extended)
[4.5] (for 0.5 < [4.5]-[8.0] < 1.4, Pointlike)
[4.5] (for 1.4 < [4.5]-[8.0])
([8.0] − [24] − 3.5)2 /1.7 + ([24] − 9.0)2 /2
[4.5] − [8.0] − 0.55(10. − [24])
[24] (for all colors)
Extended at 3.6 or 4.5μm
F70

Prob/(K − [4.5])
Smooth increase for [4.5] > 14.5
Smooth increase for [4.5] > 12.5
Smooth increase for [4.5] > 14.5
Smooth increase for [4.5] > 13.0
Smooth increase for values < 1
Smooth increase for values > 1
100% probability for [24] > 10.0
Twice as likely to be X-gal
X-gal prob × 0.1 for F70 > 400 mJy

Table 2. YSO's in Serpens
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

1
2b
3
4b
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15b
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

18275381−0002333
18280503+0006593
18280845−0001064
18281100−0001393
18281350−0002491
18281501−0002588
18281519−0001405
18281525−0002432
18281628−0003161
18281852−0003329
18281981−0001474
18282010+0029145
18282143+0010411
18282158+0000164
18282432+0034545
18282738−0011499
18282740+0000239
18282849+0026500
18282905+0027561
18284025+0016173
18284052+0022145
18284186−0003213
18284400+0053379
18284477+0051257

Prev. Namea

CDF88-2

CoKu Ser-G1

D-002

D-007

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

25.5± 1.2
783± 55
140± 7
104± 5
105± 5
33.3± 1.6
7.18±0.35
174± 9
53.1± 2.7
3.38±0.17
5.52±0.27
237± 21
13.7± 0.7
60.3± 3.0
62.4± 4.2
1130± 60
87.3± 4.5
2.47±0.16
9.80±0.57
3.71±0.20
68.2± 3.7
13.7± 0.7
18.1± 0.9
0.65±0.04

20.2± 1.0
426± 29
108± 8
63.4± 3.2
88.1± 4.7
45.6± 2.3
6.18±0.30
177± 9
48.4± 2.4
3.14±0.15
5.28±0.26
109± 9
10.1± 0.6
54.0± 2.8
46.1± 3.0
660± 35
54.6± 2.7
2.28±0.15
8.51±0.47
3.86±0.20
41.2± 2.4
24.8± 1.2
29.7± 1.4
1.77±0.09

15.6± 0.7
358± 18
129± 6
54.6± 2.6
77.5± 3.7
61.5± 3.1
5.15±0.25
180± 11
45.4± 2.1
3.13±0.16
4.90±0.24
116± 8
9.99±0.49
45.5± 2.2
41.1± 2.5
631± 30
47.3± 2.2
2.27±0.15
7.03±0.38
3.60±0.19
39.2± 2.0
39.6± 1.9
40.3± 2.0
3.08±0.16

13.9± 0.7
218± 14
122± 8
35.4± 1.9
94.3± 5.0
96.3± 5.8
5.01±0.26
191± 11
46.2± 2.5
2.99±0.15
4.02±0.21
76.6± 4.8
8.90±0.50
61.4± 3.4
32.5± 2.0
399± 22
32.3± 1.6
2.52±0.16
5.46±0.30
3.59±0.18
25.5± 1.4
49.0± 2.6
49.9± 2.5
4.81±0.23

22.7± 2.1
76.4± 7.1
161± 14
9.51±0.90
254± 23
225± 20
8.00±0.77
1200± 25
74.7± 6.9
2.96±0.36
5.58±0.54
17.5± 1.6
10.5± 1.0
170± 15
13.9± 1.3
120± 11
12.9± 1.2
2.62±0.37
43.4± 4.0
2.89±0.35
11.7± 1.1
155± 14
260± 24
37.6± 3.5

***
***
314± 36
***
382± 43
320± 41
***
1670± 169
129± 24
***
***
***
***
126± 21
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
538± 54
***
***

– 51 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

18284481+0048085
18284496+0052035
18284497+0045239
18284558−0007127
18284613+0003016
18284784+0008402
18284808+0019266
18285020+0009497
18285038−0012550
18285122+0019273
18285200+0015516
18285249+0020260
18285276+0028467
18285364+0019409
18285395+0045530
18285404+0029299
18285450+0028523
18285486+0029525
18285489+0018326
18285529+0020522
18285577+0029447
18285664+0030082
18285715+0048360
18285808+0017244

Prev. Namea

IRAS 18262+0050
IRAS 18261-0009
VV Ser

D-060

D-062/D-066
D-064
D-065

IRAS 18263+0027

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

7.80±0.40
4.32±0.28
41.3± 2.1
2920± 182
8.40±0.45
2460± 176
2.37±0.14
105± 5
322± 17
3.47±0.18
1.65±0.09
81.4± 4.7
1.84±0.10
3.56±0.19
12.5± 0.6
5.81±0.50
14.7± 0.9
1.94±0.12
0.95±0.05
24.5± 1.3
0.26±0.02
0.055±0.007
1.55±0.08
52.5± 3.0

7.30±0.36
14.2± 0.8
33.7± 1.6
2790± 172
9.41±0.47
2530± 180
2.68±0.15
107± 6
252± 12
5.12±0.26
1.60±0.08
95.7± 5.8
2.45±0.14
4.34±0.24
10.5± 0.5
27.6± 2.3
34.2± 2.0
10.6± 0.6
2.54±0.15
29.1± 1.7
1.87±0.14
0.14±0.01
1.38±0.07
36.7± 2.5

5.68±0.28
25.6± 1.3
31.3± 1.5
3070± 155
9.80±0.47
3430± 256
2.42±0.14
113± 5
232± 12
5.81±0.29
1.30±0.08
115± 5
2.58±0.15
4.03±0.21
9.45±0.46
44.8± 2.6
44.8± 2.3
20.4± 1.1
4.24±0.23
32.7± 1.7
2.23±0.14
0.12±0.03
1.18±0.07
31.2± 1.7

6.68±0.33
31.5± 2.0
30.7± 1.6
2990± 222
10.5± 0.6
3830± 271
2.57±0.14
121± 6
170± 9
7.42±0.39
1.58±0.09
129± 7
3.44±0.19
3.72±0.20
11.2± 0.6
56.4± 3.2
25.4± 1.4
30.2± 1.6
5.88±0.32
47.2± 2.6
3.08±0.17
0.22±0.05
0.74±0.06
28.5± 1.7

10.0± 0.9
547± 11
20.8± 1.9
2150± 200
7.95±0.76
2970± 281
2.50±0.36
291± 27
62.3± 5.8
65.4± 6.1
1.31±0.22
177± 16
15.7± 1.5
5.56±0.56
25.4± 2.4
918± 85
4.53±0.48
765± 70
39.4± 3.7
75.6± 7.0
126± 11
13.0± 1.2
8.83±0.83
9.74±0.92

***
***
***
206± 23
***
600± 59
***
129± 28
***
130± 16
***
102± 19
***
***
***
11100± 1040
***
7250± 675
179± 23
***
***
***
***
1040± 101

– 52 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72b

18285860+0048594
18285945+0030031
18290025+0016580
18290057+0045079
18290082+0027468
18290089+0029316
18290107+0031452
18290122+0029330
18290153+0017299
18290175+0029465
18290184+0029546
18290211+0031206
18290283+0030095
18290393+0020217
18290437+0033240
18290517+0038439
18290575+0022325
18290615+0019444
18290619+0030432
18290675+0030343
18290697+0038380
18290741+0019215
18290763+0052223
18290775+0054037

Prev. Namea

D-074

D-080
D-078
D-081
CoKu Ser-G6
CoKu Ser-G4
CoKu Ser-G3
D-084
D-086

IRAS 18265+0028?
IRAS 18265+0028?
D-096

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

10.8± 0.5
38.4± 2.1
44.4± 2.5
17.2± 0.8
8.81±0.52
246± 13
59.2± 3.6
88.8± 4.8
3.16±0.18
141± 8
586± 51
1.19±0.07
15.4± 1.0
182± 10
133± 7
3.43±0.23
36.3± 2.2
7.24±0.40
8.05±0.41
3.27±0.21
21.3± 1.4
3.07±0.17
4.50±0.23
10.2± 0.5

9.32±0.48
41.0± 2.2
34.2± 2.2
17.0± 0.8
9.62±0.55
290± 16
72.8± 4.3
97.4± 5.1
2.69±0.17
133± 6
553± 33
1.62±0.09
19.2± 1.1
175± 11
165± 12
4.04±0.20
27.1± 1.5
5.80±0.31
45.0± 2.8
11.7± 0.7
29.3± 1.5
2.28±0.13
4.03±0.20
9.86±0.48

7.40±0.35
43.5± 2.3
33.2± 1.7
13.4± 0.6
10.5± 0.6
308± 19
76.2± 4.1
91.0± 5.3
2.92±0.16
111± 6
504± 28
1.58±0.10
34.5± 2.0
179± 9
256± 13
2.52±0.16
17.8± 1.0
4.70±0.25
93.9± 4.8
14.9± 0.8
22.5± 1.3
2.17±0.12
3.59±0.18
9.66±0.47

7.25±0.43
49.4± 2.7
33.4± 1.8
13.0± 0.6
13.2± 0.7
392± 23
75.5± 4.3
100± 6
2.43±0.14
107± 10
461± 27
1.13±0.07
30.6± 1.8
171± 12
300± 18
2.04±0.11
13.6± 0.7
4.90±0.26
129± 7
20.7± 1.2
22.7± 1.1
1.71±0.09
4.66±0.23
10.2± 0.5

13.4± 1.2
81.6± 7.6
39.2± 3.6
23.6± 2.2
29.0± 2.7
711± 67
72.5± 6.7
215± 21
1.43±0.26
361± 33
407± 38
22.1± 2.0
94.2± 8.7
255± 23
615± 57
6.73±0.64
15.1± 1.4
10.3± 1.0
1320± 139
1000± 105
40.2± 3.7
0.93±0.19
9.58±0.89
11.0± 1.0

***
204± 32
***
***
***
736± 75
***
***
***
***
503± 52
276± 29
535± 54
283± 30
651± 67
***
***
***
7240± 713
11400± 1180
***
***
***
***

– 53 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90b
91
92
93
94
95
96

18290808−0007371
18290817+0105445
18290904+0031280
18290955+0037020
18290980+0034459
18291148+0020387
18291249+0018150
18291288+0009477
18291407+0002589
18291432+0107300
18291508+0052124
18291513+0039378
18291539−0012519
18291557+0039119
18291562+0039230
18291617+0018227
18291969+0018031
18292001+0024497
18292003+0121015
18292042+0121037
18292095+0030346
18292184+0019386
18292616+0020518
18292640+0030043

Prev. Namea

IRAS 18266+0035
D-105

IRAS 18266+0050

IRAS 18267+0016
D-132
K-112
D-137

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

121± 6
31.2± 1.6
0.95±0.11
837± 66
1260± 70
4.46±0.27
5.46±0.31
2.60±0.13
313± 16
2.98±0.16
1210± 64
35.4± 2.4
73.1± 3.7
13.6± 0.9
6.42±0.46
284± 27
19.6± 1.3
146± 8
126± 6
48.9± 2.4
911± 60
11.8± 0.7
742± 55
3.89±0.31

71.5± 3.6
20.7± 1.0
2.78±0.23
784± 48
1060± 72
3.36±0.19
5.15±0.29
2.02±0.11
197± 10
2.56±0.13
663± 36
37.7± 1.8
52.1± 2.5
16.2± 0.8
7.33±0.35
412± 33
20.0± 1.1
96.0± 5.3
73.9± 3.7
40.5± 2.0
414± 36
11.2± 0.6
377± 26
3.36±0.20

61.1± 2.9
14.1± 0.7
2.92±0.24
873± 61
1070± 72
2.39±0.15
4.26±0.25
1.98±0.11
170± 8
2.29±0.12
616± 31
30.8± 1.8
44.3± 2.1
15.1± 0.9
5.99±0.35
446± 27
16.4± 0.9
83.6± 4.3
61.5± 2.9
33.0± 1.6
511± 31
10.6± 0.6
382± 28
3.42±0.18

38.8± 2.1
9.66±0.47
5.03±0.40
904± 46
1000± 52
1.72±0.10
4.22±0.21
2.14±0.11
104± 5
2.15±0.11
468± 24
25.9± 1.3
42.1± 2.3
25.6± 1.3
8.05±0.39
478± 24
18.0± 0.9
56.8± 2.9
38.6± 2.0
27.1± 1.4
377± 20
10.8± 0.6
245± 14
3.87±0.21

9.83±0.92
6.58±0.63
14.0± 1.9
531± 49
778± 72
16.0± 1.5
6.49±0.67
2.18±0.31
30.7± 2.9
1.94±0.24
295± 27
5.44±0.52
25.2± 2.3
60.5± 5.6
32.5± 3.0
943± 88
31.8± 3.0
16.0± 1.5
9.95±0.95
25.5± 2.4
187± 17
14.4± 1.4
84.6± 7.8
8.75±0.82

***
***
***
85.6±20.2
76.8±13.1
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
135± 15
1740± 165
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

– 54 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120

18292678+0039498
18292729+0039066
18292735+0038497
18292822−0022571
18292897+0013104
18292927+0018000
18293083+0101072
18293195+0118429
18293254−0013233
18293300+0040089
18293319+0012122
18293336+0108245
18293381+0053118
18293561+0035038
18293619+0042167
18293635+0033560
18293644+0046217
18293670+0047579
18293767+0111299
18293881+0044381
18293986+0117561
18294020+0015131
18294121+0049020
18294124+0047296

Prev. Namea

IRAS 18268-0025

K-150
K-159
CDF88-4

K-173
D-176

K-190
K-202

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

9.98±0.73
2.18±0.15
1.56±0.11
1280± 76
308± 21
7.00±0.37
38.8± 1.9
481± 24
654± 39
6.05±0.43
687± 37
85.6± 4.9
278± 14
30.5± 2.0
21.1± 1.2
8.01±0.52
1.59±0.08
17.3± 0.8
156± 8
4.99±0.25
11.9± 0.6
3.93±0.22
7.47±0.37
0.96±0.05

13.3± 0.6
3.08±0.15
2.95±0.14
1300± 74
186± 14
5.90±0.34
35.2± 1.8
786± 42
370± 19
6.64±0.32
445± 30
72.3± 4.1
163± 8
24.1± 1.4
19.9± 1.0
5.68±0.33
1.48±0.07
15.7± 0.8
103± 5
4.58±0.22
10.5± 0.5
7.40±0.41
6.04±0.29
0.93±0.05

9.40±0.62
2.29±0.16
3.65±0.24
1550± 104
196± 10
5.35±0.27
27.6± 1.3
1140± 57
276± 13
4.70±0.31
469± 22
75.6± 3.6
138± 6
17.0± 1.0
15.6± 0.8
4.54±0.27
1.37±0.08
12.4± 0.6
84.2± 4.0
3.93±0.19
9.98±0.49
13.4± 0.7
5.67±0.28
0.88±0.06

11.9± 0.6
2.37±0.12
6.25±0.30
1760± 116
139± 7
5.31±0.28
30.7± 1.6
1830± 138
156± 8
5.53±0.27
339± 17
116± 6
85.0± 4.3
12.8± 0.7
12.8± 0.6
2.90±0.15
1.49±0.08
11.9± 0.6
56.3± 2.9
3.72±0.19
11.7± 0.6
24.4± 1.3
7.37±0.35
0.84±0.06

34.5± 3.2
1.73±0.22
18.4± 1.7
414± 85
39.8± 3.7
4.51±0.44
54.3± 5.0
4370± 407
39.7± 3.7
9.71±0.91
86.7± 8.0
148± 13
25.9± 2.4
74.2± 6.9
81.1± 7.5
1.25±0.18
1.27±0.19
17.3± 1.6
21.4± 2.0
3.35±0.34
18.4± 1.7
113± 10
7.54±0.71
1.17±0.17

64.9±11.5
***
***
730± 85
***
***
***
5190± 501
429± 47
***
***
320± 37
***
57.6±13.1
126± 17
***
***
***
***
***
***
126± 15
***
***

– 55 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

Prev. Namea

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144

18294146+0107380
18294152+0110043
18294168+0044270
18294216+0120211
18294392+0107208
18294410+0033561
18294430+0104534
18294452+0113115
18294503+0035266
18294627+0110254
18294700+0116268
18294725+0039556
18294726+0032230
18294763+0104223
18294810+0116449
18294878+0113422
18294913+0116198
18294924+0116314
18294957+0117060
18294962+0050528
18294963+0115219
18294969+0114568
18295001+0051015
18295015+0056081

K-207
K-210

95.4± 4.8
33.2± 1.6
20.6± 1.0
7.27±0.42
18.4± 0.9
20.8± 1.2
2530± 276
9.59±0.46
13.9± 0.8
9.20±0.46
11.0± 0.6
5.75±0.29
10.4± 0.6
8.59±0.46
1.96±0.10
5.08±0.25
12.0± 1.0
16.8± 0.8
42.5± 2.1
80.4± 4.1
0.85±0.08
13.8± 0.7
11.1± 0.6
29.5± 1.4

83.2± 4.1
21.2± 1.0
16.5± 0.8
6.13±0.30
17.8± 0.9
13.7± 0.7
3920± 263
7.78±0.38
12.5± 0.7
7.90±0.39
15.2± 0.8
4.17±0.20
9.28±0.51
7.54±0.39
6.98±0.42
5.17±0.25
72.6± 5.4
36.9± 1.8
95.8± 4.8
56.5± 2.8
2.64±0.27
39.0± 2.0
9.03±0.44
28.4± 1.4

72.2± 3.4
16.5± 0.8
14.9± 0.7
7.00±0.35
16.1± 0.8
11.0± 0.6
5010± 272
6.62±0.32
10.8± 0.6
7.02±0.34
18.6± 0.9
3.39±0.18
8.20±0.45
6.20±0.34
12.1± 0.6
5.12±0.25
221± 12
65.2± 3.1
143± 6
47.3± 2.2
2.32±0.28
66.6± 3.2
7.73±0.38
28.0± 1.3

81.0± 4.3
11.0± 0.6
20.1± 1.0
13.0± 0.6
13.3± 0.6
6.97±0.34
5040± 401
7.86±0.38
11.2± 0.6
6.89±0.34
19.3± 0.9
4.77±0.23
10.6± 0.5
5.77±0.30
16.7± 0.8
5.22±0.25
602± 33
101± 5
184± 13
34.2± 1.7
3.54±0.31
74.3± 3.8
6.71±0.33
31.3± 1.5

147± 13
7.69±0.75
40.0± 3.7
19.9± 1.9
10.1± 1.0
19.7± 1.8
5840± 1750
10.8± 1.0
16.4± 1.5
4.90±0.48
42.2± 4.1
16.1± 1.5
18.2± 1.7
27.5± 2.6
219± 21
6.24±0.63
6640± 1990
1360± 218
526± 48
10.8± 1.0
1180± 117
132± 12
5.47±0.53
48.7± 4.6

***
***
***
***
***
140± 17
655± 65
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
14900± 1420
***
18300± 1790
***
***
***
82800± 7810
***
***
***

K-216
K-219
IRAS 18271+0102
EC-11

EC-28

K-241
EC-33
OO Ser
V370 Ser
EC-38
K-258a
EC-40
K-252

– 56 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168

18295041+0043437
18295114+0116406
18295117+0113197
18295130+0027479
18295206+0036436
18295219+0115478
18295220+0115590
18295239+0035529
18295244+0031496
18295252+0036117
18295285+0114560
18295304+0040105
18295305+0036067
18295307+0100346
18295309+0106179
18295316+0112277
18295322+0033129
18295359+0117018
18295383+0113306
18295407+0107109
18295422+0045076
18295430+0036013
18295493+0059140
18295518+0113224

Prev. Namea

V371 Ser
EC-51

K-270

ETC-11
IRAS 18273+0034

EC-67
EC-68
K-287
IRAS 18273+0034
EC-73

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

36.9± 2.2
31.1± 2.6
2.44±0.12
33.8± 2.0
3.83±0.20
7.38±0.41
0.072±0.008
38.0± 2.2
2.86±0.15
2.49±0.14
8.65±0.44
5.17±0.28
21.0± 1.2
9.26±0.48
7.90±0.38
1.20±0.06
115± 7
41.1± 2.0
5.31±0.26
5.59±0.27
52.4± 2.7
2.39±0.25
7.16±0.37
14.6± 0.7

41.7± 2.0
72.6± 4.6
1.93±0.10
22.3± 1.3
4.64±0.27
33.0± 2.1
1.54±0.09
51.5± 2.8
3.49±0.18
4.24±0.23
34.6± 1.8
4.57±0.22
22.5± 1.2
11.7± 0.6
6.72±0.32
1.18±0.06
87.0± 4.8
38.9± 1.9
5.24±0.25
5.79±0.28
36.7± 1.8
6.57±0.42
6.23±0.30
14.8± 0.7

30.5± 1.5
141± 7
1.75±0.10
16.2± 0.9
5.59±0.29
41.3± 2.2
4.96±0.25
54.9± 3.0
3.69±0.21
5.18±0.28
72.0± 3.4
3.84±0.20
22.5± 1.2
7.45±0.37
5.59±0.28
1.17±0.07
71.2± 3.8
33.6± 1.6
5.40±0.27
5.32±0.27
24.2± 1.2
7.32±0.44
4.57±0.23
13.8± 0.7

24.0± 1.2
208± 10
1.87±0.10
10.1± 0.6
6.19±0.32
40.0± 2.6
5.90±0.29
54.7± 2.9
4.56±0.24
6.55±0.36
110± 5
3.79±0.19
35.0± 1.9
6.74±0.41
5.84±0.29
1.43±0.08
51.2± 2.7
33.0± 1.6
5.39±0.26
5.95±0.29
15.2± 0.7
5.80±0.31
4.89±0.25
15.6± 0.8

21.1± 2.0
992± 92
2.37±0.39
4.81±0.50
21.0± 1.9
1640± 154
75.1±10.2
105± 9
4.61±0.45
100± 9
1040± 96
7.07±0.67
333± 30
17.3± 1.6
7.44±0.73
1.18±0.22
18.4± 1.7
26.7± 2.5
6.05±0.65
11.0± 1.0
7.78±0.73
16.0± 1.5
9.62±0.93
74.7± 6.9

***
8480± 805
***
163± 18
***
15200± 1420
***
562± 55
***
1910± 179
5570± 523
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
1270± 121
***
***

– 57 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

Prev. Namea

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192

18295531+0049393
18295537+0053242
18295569+0114315
18295592+0040150
18295620+0033391
18295655+0112595
18295667+0112392
18295687+0114465
18295701+0033003
18295714+0033185
18295758+0113005
18295762+0100057
18295766+0113046
18295772+0114057
18295780+0115318
18295780+0112279
18295783+0112514
18295784+0112378
18295789+0112462
18295819+0115218
18295871+0036205
18295877+0114262
18295902+0112251
18295911+0111202

IRAS 18273+0047

578± 36
5.47±0.28
63.5± 3.2
9.63±0.49
13.4± 0.8
25.4± 1.2
16.3± 0.8
581± 30
377± 25
124± 8
66.1± 3.2
2.36±0.12
23.5± 1.2
2480± 189
65.0± 3.2
14.1± 0.7
108± 5
40.1± 2.0
131± 6
153± 9
10.8± 0.7
49.2± 2.6
2.38±0.14
8.16±0.41

475± 24
4.39±0.22
92.3± 4.7
8.88±0.45
15.5± 0.8
26.9± 1.3
35.9± 1.8
688± 36
353± 20
144± 8
175± 8
1.95±0.10
32.5± 1.9
2970± 279
68.4± 3.2
20.6± 1.0
167± 8
55.9± 2.7
160± 7
181± 9
10.2± 0.6
90.8± 4.6
3.66±0.18
5.94±0.28

421± 20
3.23±0.17
121± 5
7.98±0.40
12.8± 0.7
28.0± 1.3
37.4± 1.8
822± 41
305± 18
138± 7
251± 11
1.71±0.10
41.1± 1.9
5100± 375
59.3± 2.8
20.2± 1.0
222± 10
61.1± 2.9
181± 8
170± 8
8.68±0.48
134± 6
4.83±0.25
4.29±0.21

345± 18
2.66±0.14
134± 6
10.2± 0.5
10.7± 0.6
29.4± 1.5
30.9± 1.5
1580± 86
284± 14
126± 7
289± 15
1.86±0.13
56.2± 3.4
5360± 384
52.6± 2.6
17.2± 0.9
361± 19
61.6± 3.2
180± 10
194± 10
9.33±0.49
143± 8
6.20±0.31
2.58±0.14

913± 84
2.15±0.27
229± 21
12.8± 1.2
7.49±0.71
49.1± 5.1
36.8± 4.0
4280± 406
198± 18
80.2± 7.4
1990± 191
1.39±0.34
276± 32
7860± 2350
86.2± 9.9
22.9± 5.0
2860± 285
84.2± 9.8
388± 50
525± 49
13.0± 1.2
620± 58
28.4± 2.8
5.17±0.55

2340± 222
***
***
***
***
***
***
19700± 1880
71.0±12.2
***
***
***
***
26000± 2440
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

EC-74

EC-79
EC-80
CoKu Ser-G7

EC-88
EC-89
EC-90
K-319
EC-91
EC-92
EC-94
EC-95
EC-97
EC-103
K-327
HH 456

– 58 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216

18295914+0037355
18295923+0114077
18295927+0114016
18295937+0110410
18295956+0111590
18295992+0113116
18300007+0103057
18300019+0114036
18300030+0109447
18300047+0037287
18300070+0113014
18300109+0113244
18300166+0104430
18300178+0032162
18300208+0113589
18300273+0112282
18300339+0116194
18300350+0023450
18300358+0116409
18300382+0053406
18300384+0056206
18300408+0106559
18300490+0114395
18300501+0112360

Prev. Namea

EC-105
HH 457
K-330
K-331
EC-114
K-332
GCNM-130
EC-121

EC-125
EC-129
EC-135
EC-137

EC-149
EC-152

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

3.81±0.19
179± 11
2.72±0.28
0.65±0.04
80.2± 5.1
2.77±0.16
6.19±0.30
8.71±0.43
18.3± 0.9
6.18±0.35
0.38±0.04
10.3± 0.5
4.34±0.22
18.2± 1.4
15.7± 0.8
238± 12
39.7± 2.0
11.3± 0.6
2.50±0.13
4.76±0.24
3.58±0.18
1.42±0.07
6.57±0.33
2.48±0.12

3.02±0.15
201± 12
5.76±0.44
2.91±0.14
261± 15
29.5± 1.5
4.79±0.23
9.51±0.47
47.3± 2.4
5.52±0.28
1.23±0.10
13.9± 0.7
4.95±0.25
17.6± 0.9
21.9± 1.1
369± 18
34.5± 1.7
11.5± 0.6
2.58±0.13
3.86±0.19
2.94±0.14
1.22±0.06
5.71±0.28
2.38±0.12

2.50±0.14
215± 12
7.78±1.16
5.31±0.26
414± 21
103± 4
4.35±0.21
9.34±0.56
75.6± 3.6
4.30±0.24
2.08±0.16
13.6± 0.7
4.51±0.23
11.9± 0.7
27.6± 1.3
497± 23
32.4± 1.5
8.05±0.44
2.31±0.12
2.94±0.15
2.54±0.14
1.14±0.07
5.15±0.26
2.28±0.12

2.54±0.13
182± 23
36.0± 5.4
5.82±0.29
483± 28
199± 10
7.07±0.36
15.0± 0.8
82.7± 4.3
3.34±0.17
3.55±0.21
13.0± 0.6
5.65±0.28
13.3± 0.8
34.6± 1.7
551± 30
53.2± 2.7
8.78±0.48
2.34±0.12
2.59±0.14
2.33±0.12
1.05±0.07
5.53±0.27
2.33±0.12

5.79±0.55
119± 25
109± 19
11.4± 1.1
1720± 161
2620± 249
34.3± 3.2
36.3± 3.8
78.8± 7.3
7.24±0.68
95.8±11.4
56.9± 5.4
11.1± 1.1
26.1± 2.4
167± 15
1910± 178
112± 10
13.5± 1.3
3.91±0.48
1.59±0.31
1.56±0.29
3.53±0.38
4.26±0.46
3.32±0.42

***
***
12200± 1160
***
***
6830± 675
***
***
***
***
8640± 829
***
***
***
***
5230± 488
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

– 59 –

ID

Table 2-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235

18300543+0101023
18300608+0106171
18300640+0101058
18300769+0112046
18300849+0101374
18300861+0058466
18300891+0047221
18300921+0117526
18300942+0102473
18301084+0047008
18301109+0112382
18301327+0102489
18301395+0108515
18301698+0113075
18301728+0121328
18301816+0114169
18302239+0120440
18302311+0120097
18302342+0105047

a Source

Prev. Namea

K-357
K-359
K-366
K-367
K-370
K-382
K-379
K-393
K-407

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

4.58±0.22
19.0± 1.0
41.7± 2.0
80.2± 4.1
15.9± 0.8
63.6± 3.1
5.83±0.29
8.35±0.41
280± 14
1.83±0.09
9.72±0.48
5.50±0.28
5.38±0.29
1.41±0.07
412± 21
18.7± 1.0
6.71±0.34
4.73±0.23
14.5± 0.7

3.23±0.16
16.8± 0.8
41.2± 2.0
76.1± 3.9
16.0± 0.8
52.2± 2.6
3.93±0.19
8.15±0.40
179± 9
1.51±0.07
9.13±0.45
4.31±0.21
4.09±0.20
1.27±0.06
246± 13
20.3± 1.0
4.79±0.24
3.28±0.16
13.9± 0.7

2.37±0.12
15.2± 0.7
40.2± 1.9
77.2± 3.7
12.7± 0.6
47.7± 2.4
2.75±0.15
7.34±0.38
151± 7
1.20±0.07
9.71±0.47
3.54±0.18
3.55±0.18
1.18±0.07
219± 11
22.7± 1.1
3.65±0.19
2.21±0.12
13.4± 0.7

2.07±0.12
19.1± 0.9
49.6± 2.5
81.4± 4.2
15.2± 0.7
73.1± 4.1
1.60±0.09
7.15±0.37
107± 5
1.18±0.08
12.9± 0.6
3.68±0.19
3.89±0.20
1.24±0.07
141± 7
34.6± 1.7
2.52±0.14
1.37±0.09
15.2± 0.7

11.6± 1.1
36.6± 3.4
66.3± 6.1
124± 11
39.4± 3.7
229± 21
7.95±0.77
9.83±0.93
51.1± 4.7
0.99±0.19
18.4± 1.7
4.56±0.55
7.48±0.73
4.35±0.45
45.6± 4.2
111± 10
8.56±0.84
3.90±0.43
56.9± 5.3

***
***
***
363± 42
***
303± 31
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

names from SIMBAD, including numbers from the following catalogs: EC, Eiroa & Casali (1992); D,
Djupvik et al. (2006); K, Kaas et al. (2004).

– 60 –

ID

b May

be AGB star, based on Av derived from optical spectrum.

– 61 –

Table 3. YSO Candidates in Serpens Without 4-Band IRAC Observations
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

236
237
238
239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257
258
259

18273421+0040260
18274024+0035221
18274264+0020389
18274399+0025135
18274484+0052436
18274506+0006110
18275926+0056012
18280449+0049498
18281904+0101333
18282591−0032587
18283708+0149440
18283939+0106157
18284039+0106144
18285056+0101121
18285486+0108548
18295035+0008472
18295096−0033057
18295439+0002476
18300035+0011201
18300130+0159309
18300155+0037339
18300181−0037039
18300237+0040549
18300403+0034240

Prev. Name

IRAC 18251+0023
IRAS 18251+0004

IRAS 18257+0059
IRAS 18258-0034
IRAS 18261+0104
IRAS 18261+0104
IRAS 18264+0106

IRAS 18275-0039

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

***
***
***
***
***
1730± 93
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
4.43±0.22
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
322± 26
299± 20
***
96.0± 6.5
***
3.72±0.20
***
4.56±0.22
***

***
***
***
***
***
965± 47
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
3.08±0.16
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
258± 14
146± 7
***
60.7± 3.3
***
1.94±0.11
***
4.52±0.22
***

17.8± 1.7
1.36±0.25
42.0± 3.9
5430± 509
1.49±0.27
173± 16
40.7± 3.9
15.2± 1.4
112± 10
279± 43
57.3± 5.3
356± 33
160± 14
1.93±0.31
329± 30
89.4± 8.3
50.8± 4.7
77.5± 7.2
19.5± 1.8
1.14±0.22
1.22±0.20
29.9± 2.8
3.45±0.38
217± 20

***
***
***
655± 68
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
798± 77

– 62 –

ID

Table 3-Continued
Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

260
261
262
263
264
265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283

18300528+0036467
18300569+0039318
18300615+0042339
18301017+0039290
18301188+0036118
18301547+0028278
18301771+0036115
18301831+0021589
18301943+0055171
18301948+0037211
18301981+0040273
18301983+0002536
18301991+0041532
18302200+0043377
18302248+0033169
18302274+0044382
18302320+0033388
18302326+0042297
18302419+0035072
18302892+0037532
18302984+0035007
18303313+0026437
18303413+0038011
18303587+0040272

Prev. Name

GSC00446-00153

IRAS 18277+0034
IRAS 18277+0019

HD 170635

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

***
19.6± 1.0
1040± 58
7.50±0.37
***
***
***
***
1.64±0.08
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

***
17.9± 0.9
1180± 62
8.12±0.39
***
***
***
***
0.72±0.06
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

1.93±0.25
34.6± 3.2
3020± 283
12.2± 1.1
10.8± 1.0
2.76±0.40
946± 87
320± 29
1.63±0.26
377± 34
2.16±0.31
122± 11
27.2± 2.5
118± 10
9.64±0.92
15.1± 1.4
1.70±0.24
14.8± 1.4
2.39±0.31
3.06±0.35
26.0± 2.4
87.7± 8.2
11.8± 1.1
130± 12

***
76.2±19.5
3920± 370
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
120± 18
***
***
***
***
***
***
274± 32
***
***
***

– 63 –

ID

Table 3-Continued
ID

Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

284
285
286

18303595+0040385
18303898+0034530
18304881+0038000

Prev. Name

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

70.0 μm
(mJy)

***
***
***

***
***
***

***
***
***

***
***
***

71.7± 6.7
20.1± 1.9
98.8± 9.1

136± 23
***
***

– 64 –

Table 4. Matching Spitzer Sources/Fluxes For Previously Identified IR Sources In Serpens
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

18282432+0034545
18282442+0026509
18282649+0031421
18282783+0028390
18282792+0029288
18282864+0024120
18282905+0027561
18282912+0034193
18283208+0025036
18283221+0035361
18283261+0037322
18283317+0025451
18283351+0026595
18283434+0031119
18283503+0026406
18283572+0038458
18283576+0038231
18283579+0026160
18283639+0026388
18283741+0027100
18283752+0032311
18283791+0025512

62.4± 4.2
105± 9
38.1± 2.7
6.72±0.45
5.12±0.32
5.68±0.38
9.80±0.57
193± 13
11.2± 0.6
33.6± 2.0
15.0± 0.9
24.9± 1.5
60.6± 3.6
10.2± 0.6
53.0± 3.2
227± 15
6.23±0.38
191± 12
31.8± 1.9
9.45±0.54
7.64±0.49
46.4± 2.8

46.1± 3.0
95.6± 7.8
25.8± 1.7
4.47±0.29
3.56±0.25
3.71±0.25
8.51±0.47
93.2± 6.4
6.47±0.38
20.6± 1.1
9.38±0.50
15.0± 0.9
34.5± 2.2
7.06±0.41
34.2± 2.1
130± 7
4.19±0.23
122± 8
21.1± 1.3
6.52±0.40
5.69±0.30
26.1± 1.6

41.1± 2.5
97.9± 6.5
20.1± 1.2
3.44±0.21
2.76±0.16
3.27±0.20
7.03±0.38
86.6± 4.5
5.42±0.27
16.1± 0.9
7.02±0.39
12.1± 0.6
26.4± 1.4
5.39±0.31
31.8± 1.7
104± 5
2.82±0.16
114± 6
19.4± 1.0
5.68±0.36
4.05±0.24
26.5± 1.4

32.5± 2.0
65.0± 4.2
12.2± 0.8
2.27±0.14
1.79±0.12
1.92±0.12
5.46±0.30
49.3± 2.9
3.15±0.20
9.61±0.49
4.40±0.23
7.15±0.41
15.9± 0.9
3.42±0.19
19.2± 1.1
61.0± 3.5
1.72±0.10
63.5± 3.9
11.3± 0.7
3.35±0.20
2.52±0.14
15.3± 0.9

13.9± 1.3
13.9± 1.3
1.26±0.28
< 1.53
< 1.45
< 1.44
43.4± 4.0
5.99±0.58
< 1.25
0.99±0.23
< 1.41
0.70±0.25
1.46±0.22
< 1.54
2.71±0.35
6.91±0.66
< 1.19
7.10±0.69
1.20±0.23
< 1.26
< 1.22
2.38±0.31

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

– 65 –

D002
D001
D003
D004
D005
D006
D007
D008
D010
D009
D011
D012
D013
D014
D015
D017
D016
D018
D019
D020
D021
D022

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

– 66 –

D023
18283828+0027182 8.55±0.48
5.58±0.34 4.71±0.26 2.88±0.17
< 1.21
D024 D025 18283964+0038339
145± 9
102± 5
70.6± 3.8 42.1± 2.3 4.46±0.46
D026
18284001+0028563 4.77±0.28
4.10±0.24 3.04±0.17 1.83±0.10
< 1.17
D027
18284011+0027502
95.4± 6.1
59.6± 3.5
56.2± 3.0 29.4± 1.7 3.61±0.37
D028
18284031+0032419 0.024±0.008 0.019±0.005
< 0.23
< 0.19
< 1.59
D031
18284042+0028246 0.93±0.05
0.69±0.04 0.58±0.05 0.35±0.04
< 1.19
D030
18284079+0035281
42.1± 2.7
28.8± 1.8
21.8± 1.2 13.1± 0.8 1.27±0.26
D029
18284080+0033242 1.66±0.10
1.09±0.07 0.81±0.06 0.46±0.05
< 1.44
D032
18284099+0034194 9.15±0.56
5.76±0.34 4.35±0.26 2.83±0.16
< 1.53
D033
18284118+0025187
183± 10
93.6± 6.7
103± 5
56.0± 3.4 7.33±0.73
D035
18284174+0037017
19.3± 1.2
13.7± 0.7
10.5± 0.6 6.47±0.33 0.57±0.26
D034
18284196+0027242 6.04±0.35
4.17±0.25 3.47±0.19 2.05±0.12
< 1.37
D036
18284219+0029341 0.033±0.006 0.041±0.008
< 0.21
< 0.25
< 1.48
K007
18284240+0114314
***
***
***
***
2.27±0.47
D037
18284310+0035378
30.1± 1.9
18.8± 1.0
14.9± 0.8 8.71±0.47 1.01±0.20
D038
18284335+0024502
22.5± 1.3
14.0± 0.8
12.0± 0.6 6.73±0.39 0.88±0.21
D040
18284345+0037174 9.95±0.62
6.82±0.35 5.19±0.28 3.17±0.16
< 1.27
D039
18284349+0031102 9.79±0.60
6.65±0.40 5.70±0.33 3.58±0.26
< 1.58
K011
18284519+0110253
***
***
***
***
1.46±0.25
K012
18284527+0116473
***
***
***
***
5.27±0.59
D042
18284557+0027582 6.44±0.37
4.39±0.24 3.75±0.21 2.21±0.12
< 1.19
D041
18284558+0023099 0.13±0.01
0.10±0.01
< 0.26
< 0.26
< 1.59

70μm
(mJy)

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

18284560+0037485 6.99±0.38
4.42±0.23 3.42±0.18 2.07±0.11
< 1.30
18284702+0110409
***
***
***
***
5.75±0.57
18284742+0031450 5.98±0.32
3.96±0.20 3.02±0.16 1.85±0.10
< 1.20
18284763+0024552 0.079±0.010 0.098±0.030
< 0.31
0.28±0.09
< 1.26
18284770+0036054
10.8± 0.6
6.97±0.36 5.06±0.27 2.84±0.15
< 1.53
18284797+0037432
187± 13
104± 6
98.4± 5.2 56.9± 3.0 7.07±0.68
18284838+0032471 7.20±0.42
4.46±0.24 3.57±0.20 1.93±0.11
< 1.47
18284846+0113192
***
***
***
***
2.53±0.37
18284889+0038131
110± 6
70.0± 3.6
54.3± 2.8 33.4± 1.7 3.50±0.37
18284958+0023296 9.17±0.47
6.38±0.35 5.55±0.28 2.99±0.22
< 1.24
18284973+0119129
***
***
***
***
5.99±0.62
18284976+0028116 9.02±0.51
6.10±0.31 4.83±0.26 2.75±0.15
< 1.48
18285032+0026518 9.29±0.52
6.78±0.37 5.99±0.32 3.55±0.20
< 1.41
18285062+0034513
49.5± 2.7
27.3± 1.7
25.0± 1.3 14.8± 0.9 1.76±0.27
18285066+0030514
21.8± 1.3
18.2± 1.0
16.1± 0.9 10.1± 0.5 1.09±0.23
18285136+0031540 9.11±0.53
6.38±0.35 4.88±0.28 3.13±0.17
< 1.25
18285139+0025421
21.5± 1.1
15.7± 0.9
12.0± 0.6 7.38±0.41 0.73±0.29
18285175+0024408
15.4± 1.0
13.4± 0.8
10.1± 0.6 6.13±0.34 0.85±0.30
18285198+0037205
23.7± 1.3
14.7± 0.8
12.3± 0.6 7.35±0.37 0.77±0.27
18285266+0028243
208± 14
149± 9
175± 10 90.7± 5.1 13.3± 1.2
18285276+0028467 1.84±0.10
2.45±0.14 2.58±0.15 3.44±0.19 15.7± 1.5
18285340+0037191 8.18±0.45
5.24±0.27 4.42±0.24 2.68±0.14
< 1.26

70μm
(mJy)
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

– 67 –

D043
K016
D044
D045
D046
D047
D048
K020
D049
D050
K024
D051
D052
D054
D053
D057
D055
D056
D058
D059
D060
D061

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

– 68 –

D063
18285387+0038462 0.10±0.01 0.072±0.008 0.074±0.032 0.12±0.04
< 1.38
***
D062 D066 18285404+0029299 5.81±0.50
27.6± 2.3
44.8± 2.6
56.4± 3.2 918± 85 11100± 1040
D064
18285450+0028523 14.7± 0.9
34.2± 2.0
44.8± 2.3
25.4± 1.4 4.53±0.48
***
D065
18285486+0029525 1.94±0.12
10.6± 0.6
20.4± 1.1
30.2± 1.6 765± 70
7250± 675
D067
18285526+0035589 8.88±0.50 5.79±0.32
4.75±0.26 2.84±0.15
< 1.49
***
D069
18285597+0037435 6.72±0.38 4.77±0.25
3.79±0.21 2.23±0.12
< 1.50
***
D068
18285612+0023551 42.4± 2.8
25.4± 1.5
22.5± 1.3
12.5± 0.8 1.50±0.23
***
D070
18285711+0028082 12.7± 0.7
9.32±0.49
7.45±0.40 4.29±0.23
< 1.23
***
D071
18285742+0033539 75.8± 4.6
41.2± 2.7
39.5± 2.1
22.1± 1.4 3.14±0.39
***
D072
18285770+0036535 9.91±0.55 6.46±0.34
5.27±0.29 3.24±0.17
< 1.21
***
K042
18285843+0111012
***
***
***
***
1.62±0.24
***
D073
18285866+0023300 149± 10
101± 5
75.7± 4.3
48.3± 2.7 5.63±0.55
***
D076
18285940+0032514 2.96±0.17 2.11±0.12
1.72±0.10 1.05±0.07
< 1.21
***
D074
18285945+0030031 38.4± 2.1
41.0± 2.2
43.5± 2.3
49.4± 2.7 81.6± 7.6
204± 32
D075
18285949+0034486 31.8± 1.8
16.8± 1.1
16.4± 0.9
9.67±0.56 0.94±0.19
***
D077
18285971+0027292
102± 6
61.7± 3.7
52.2± 2.8
31.0± 1.7 3.36±0.40
***
K046
18285996+0110016
***
***
***
***
2.16±0.27
***
K049
18290054+0118202 523± 29
280± 17
221± 11
122± 6
12.9± 1.2
***
D080
18290082+0027468 8.81±0.52 9.62±0.55
10.5± 0.6
13.2± 0.7 29.0± 2.7
***
D078
18290089+0029316 246± 13
290± 16
308± 19
392± 23
711± 67
736± 75
D081
18290107+0031452 59.2± 3.6
72.8± 4.3
76.2± 4.1
75.5± 4.3 72.5± 6.7
***
D079
18290112+0026387 47.8± 3.0
29.4± 1.7
24.8± 1.3
14.6± 0.8 1.54±0.28
***

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

18290184+0029546
18290261+0033003
18290283+0030095
18290315+0023092
18290366+0118347
18290381+0110426
18290436+0116208
18290437+0033240
18290445+0109470
18290487+0120082
18290507+0122115
18290521+0029254
18290560+0026244
18290576+0032516
18290619+0030432
18290642+0032354
18290670+0035267
18290675+0030343
18290697+0038380
18290700+0027395
18290731+0027137
18290742+0033498

586± 51
93.8± 5.8
15.4± 1.0
290± 20
53.7± 2.7
68.4± 3.4
183± 9
133± 7
0.39±0.02
117± 5
88.2± 4.5
48.1± 2.6
560± 35
10.6± 0.5
8.05±0.41
6.40±0.34
10.5± 0.6
3.27±0.21
21.3± 1.4
22.6± 1.3
154± 9
11.3± 0.6

553± 33
63.6± 3.7
19.2± 1.1
172± 10
34.5± 1.7
38.3± 1.9
113± 5
165± 12
0.26±0.02
65.5± 3.3
52.1± 2.6
41.6± 2.3
290± 21
8.53±0.48
45.0± 2.8
5.65±0.33
7.01±0.40
11.7± 0.7
29.3± 1.5
16.5± 0.9
91.5± 5.1
6.91±0.40

504± 28
54.8± 2.9
34.5± 2.0
142± 8
28.3± 1.3
28.8± 1.4
90.5± 4.3
256± 13
0.11±0.03
50.8± 2.6
38.5± 1.8
33.9± 1.8
227± 12
7.66±0.38
93.9± 4.8
6.30±0.32
5.93±0.31
14.9± 0.8
22.5± 1.3
12.3± 0.6
75.1± 3.8
5.99±0.31

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

461± 27
407± 38
503± 52
32.3± 1.8 3.57±0.37
***
30.6± 1.8 94.2± 8.7
535± 54
84.9± 4.8 9.92±0.93
***
19.1± 0.9 2.28±0.28
***
17.6± 0.9 1.47±0.22
***
51.8± 2.7 5.65±0.55
***
300± 18
615± 57
651± 67
< 0.27
< 1.04
***
29.7± 1.5 2.86±0.45
***
22.7± 1.1 2.15±0.34
***
19.7± 1.1
< 1.30
***
125± 7
13.5± 1.3
***
4.16±0.25 0.61±0.26
***
129± 7
1320± 139 7240± 713
3.38±0.20
< 1.28
***
3.66±0.22
< 1.10
***
20.7± 1.2 1000± 105 11400± 1180
22.7± 1.1 40.2± 3.7
***
7.21±0.39 0.67±0.29
***
43.0± 2.3 4.96±0.51
***
3.37±0.19 0.51±0.23
***

– 69 –

D082
D083
D084
D085
K061
K063
K066
D086
P01
K065
K069
D087
D088
D089
D090
D091
D093
D094
D096
D092
D097
D095

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

18290793+0112390
18290864+0032408
18290899+0109232
18290906+0031323
18290910+0022557
18290911+0037223
18290953+0038320
18290955+0037020
18290980+0034459
18290982+0031557
18290986+0029331
18291069+0118320
18291088+0029263
18291088+0118091
18291216+0029147
18291221+0026581
18291224+0030087
18291267+0111234
18291317+0038481
18291324+0031464
18291343+0035188
18291345+0037450

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

40.1± 2.0
23.4± 1.1
17.3± 0.8
8.69±0.46 5.32±0.34 5.18±0.27
127± 6
69.6± 3.5
53.4± 2.5
< 0.12
0.29±0.03 0.40±0.09
9.89±0.56 6.97±0.37 5.16±0.27
10.4± 0.7
8.53±0.44 6.28±0.45
3.68±0.24 3.16±0.16 2.23±0.14
837± 66
784± 48
873± 61
1260± 70
1060± 72
1070± 72
1.60±0.12 1.72±0.12 1.89±0.11
33.3± 2.1
22.1± 1.4
17.9± 1.0
88.8± 4.4
52.7± 2.7
40.5± 1.9
414± 27
169± 14
195± 10
36.6± 1.8
21.9± 1.1
16.1± 0.8
32.9± 2.1
20.9± 1.3
17.4± 0.9
106± 6
63.5± 3.4
49.4± 2.7
11.4± 0.7
7.71±0.47 7.17±0.40
76.0± 3.8
46.5± 2.3
34.8± 1.7
84.4± 6.1
68.8± 3.5
52.9± 3.0
< 0.041 0.020±0.006
< 0.21
76.4± 4.4
42.2± 3.2
31.0± 1.8
6.26±0.41 4.85±0.25 3.48±0.22

8.0μm
(mJy)
10.2± 0.5
3.06±0.18
31.7± 1.6
0.31±0.08
3.12±0.18
4.22±0.23
1.42±0.08
904± 46
1000± 52
1.16±0.09
10.6± 0.6
24.2± 1.2
112± 6
9.93±0.49
10.2± 0.6
31.3± 1.5
4.48±0.25
21.2± 1.0
34.6± 1.7
< 0.25
19.5± 1.0
2.35±0.12

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

0.99±0.21
***
< 1.08
***
3.18±0.35
***
64.6± 6.0 6380± 611
< 1.47
***
0.86±0.24
***
< 1.04
***
531± 49 85.6±20.2
778± 72 76.8±13.1
< 1.11
***
1.74±0.23
***
1.87±0.26
***
13.2± 1.2
***
0.84±0.19
***
0.96±0.17
***
3.20±0.34
***
< 1.05
***
1.72±0.24
***
3.79±0.38
***
< 1.05
***
1.86±0.26
***
< 0.94
***

– 70 –

K074
D099
K080
D101
D098
D100
D102
D103
D105
D106
D104
K082
D107
K084
D109
D110
D108
K091
D112
D111
D114
D115

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

18291346+0112002
18291370+0025256
18291405+0121318
18291426+0031255
18291450+0026112
18291454+0025044
18291485+0023081
18291506+0122014
18291599+0109383
18291602+0026436
18291629+0022503
18291698+0037093
18291699+0037193
18291703+0118401
18291746+0026188
18291805+0030493
18291836+0038233
18291867+0034383
18291878+0033382
18291884+0031402
18291891+0029522
18291966+0027073

438± 23
35.5± 1.9
114± 5
29.0± 1.5
13.4± 0.7
7.86±0.43
15.4± 0.8
280± 17
531± 40
19.1± 1.3
21.6± 1.2
29.3± 1.9
93.1± 6.6
92.8± 4.7
6.99±0.38
10.1± 0.6
9.53±0.60
20.9± 1.1
3.63±0.19
3.33±0.20
108± 6
15.7± 1.0

241± 12
21.2± 1.1
63.2± 3.1
22.0± 1.4
9.59±0.50
4.95±0.26
8.88±0.50
167± 8
262± 16
12.5± 0.7
13.8± 0.8
22.2± 1.1
65.7± 3.4
54.1± 2.7
4.74±0.25
7.12±0.44
6.95±0.34
12.4± 0.8
3.06±0.17
2.15±0.14
56.7± 4.1
11.8± 0.6

199± 9
16.5± 0.8
51.8± 2.5
25.3± 1.3
6.66±0.34
3.66±0.20
7.18±0.45
122± 6
222± 11
9.31±0.52
10.4± 0.5
16.5± 1.0
54.9± 3.2
43.7± 2.1
3.35±0.18
5.53±0.28
5.11±0.30
10.8± 0.5
3.29±0.17
1.60±0.10
53.2± 2.9
8.44±0.47

114± 6
10.0± 0.5
29.5± 1.5
14.7± 0.8
4.39±0.22
2.27±0.12
4.25±0.23
71.1± 3.7
125± 6
6.01±0.30
6.26±0.34
10.5± 0.5
35.1± 1.8
25.7± 1.3
2.19±0.12
3.32±0.19
3.27±0.17
6.54±0.34
1.92±0.11
0.89±0.07
30.1± 1.7
5.44±0.27

13.2± 1.2
1.05±0.19
3.51±0.39
1.49±0.21
< 1.33
< 1.35
< 1.27
7.29±0.70
14.5± 1.4
0.60±0.27
0.74±0.32
0.85±0.15
4.13±0.40
2.34±0.33
< 1.35
< 0.98
< 0.97
0.51±0.19
< 0.93
< 0.94
3.02±0.32
< 1.13

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

– 71 –

K094
D113
K096
D116
D117
D118
D119
K098
K102
D121
D120
D122
D123
K104
D124
D125
D126
D129
D128
D130
D127
D131

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

18291972+0037596
18291979+0024109
18292001+0024497
18292003+0121015
18292007+0034121
18292014+0028576
18292049+0108550
18292095+0030346
18292135+0035320
18292162+0036571
18292184+0037545
18292253+0034176
18292272+0110329
18292277+0031579
18292342+0031061
18292342+0034309
18292351+0033054
18292387+0029197
18292387+0032070
18292395+0038145
18292449+0035215
18292452+0037405

25.6± 1.7
65.3± 3.3
146± 8
126± 6
2.37±0.12
7.31±0.43
15.3± 0.8
911± 60
5.18±0.28
43.0± 3.0
9.49±0.60
37.6± 2.0
15.1± 0.8
8.02±0.45
13.9± 0.7
1.59±0.09
< 0.035
7.74±0.45
9.46±0.52
13.4± 0.9
20.3± 1.2
7.19±0.52

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

21.3± 1.1
15.1± 0.9
9.77±0.49 0.88±0.16
34.1± 1.8
28.1± 1.4
16.3± 0.8 1.67±0.26
96.0± 5.3
83.6± 4.3
56.8± 2.9 16.0± 1.5
73.9± 3.7
61.5± 2.9
38.6± 2.0 9.95±0.95
1.71±0.10 1.47±0.09 0.88±0.07
< 1.19
4.86±0.27 3.99±0.23 2.37±0.13
< 0.93
9.97±0.48 6.77±0.33 4.12±0.20 0.45±0.19
414± 36
511± 31
377± 20
187± 17
3.41±0.20 2.81±0.16 1.91±0.15
< 1.02
34.2± 1.7
27.6± 1.6
17.2± 0.9 1.46±0.20
7.58±0.37 5.39±0.33 3.62±0.18
< 0.95
24.3± 1.4
17.7± 0.9
9.85±0.79
< 3.80
9.81±0.48 6.72±0.33 4.13±0.21 0.51±0.19
4.83±0.30 3.83±0.20 2.24±0.13 0.42±0.19
8.14±0.50 6.27±0.33 3.99±0.22
< 1.01
1.21±0.07 0.87±0.06 0.55±0.12
< 2.03
< 0.052 0.071±0.028
< 0.29
< 1.00
4.91±0.30 3.92±0.22 2.36±0.14
< 1.02
6.14±0.36 4.60±0.25 2.87±0.16
< 0.99
11.3± 0.6
8.05±0.50 5.47±0.27 0.56±0.20
13.9± 0.8
10.7± 0.6
7.24±0.36 0.62±0.21
6.34±0.31 4.29±0.28 2.96±0.15
< 0.96

70μm
(mJy)
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

– 72 –

D134
D133
D132
K112
D136
D135
P02
D137
D138
D139
D140
D141
P03
D142
D144
D143
D145
D148
D146
D147
D149
D150

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

18292541+0029304 0.39±0.03
0.25±0.02 0.16±0.03 0.10±0.03
< 0.97
18292551+0027152 0.015±0.004
< 0.044
< 0.16
< 0.24
< 0.98
18292557+0025269
46.8± 2.6
28.9± 1.5
22.8± 1.2 14.4± 0.8 1.32±0.21
18292571+0103470
206± 13
117± 6
90.6± 4.3 52.2± 2.6 5.60±0.53
18292640+0030043 3.89±0.31
3.36±0.20 3.42±0.18 3.87±0.21 8.75±0.82
18292647+0029471 5.66±0.32
3.32±0.21 3.14±0.17 1.81±0.10
< 0.93
18292653+0118033 0.031±0.006 0.024±0.006
< 0.20
< 0.26
< 1.19
18292674+0111552
66.3± 3.3
38.2± 1.9
29.1± 1.4 17.7± 0.9 1.54±0.22
18292735+0023101 9.24±0.59
6.43±0.35 4.86±0.26 3.03±0.17
< 1.11
18292740+0027111 6.73±0.38
4.26±0.23 3.76±0.20 2.15±0.16
< 0.97
18292758+0112585
54.7± 2.7
34.3± 1.7
22.6± 1.1 12.9± 0.6 1.11±0.18
18292777+0032075
14.9± 1.1
9.08±0.65 8.07±0.46 5.03±0.27 0.50±0.18
18292800+0032334
47.2± 3.2
24.8± 1.8
24.2± 1.4 15.4± 0.8 1.48±0.22
18292834+0023041
37.7± 2.4
24.8± 1.3
19.6± 1.0 11.9± 0.6 1.07±0.18
18292859+0110274
176± 9
96.6± 4.9
80.4± 3.8 46.2± 2.3 5.48±0.52
18292879+0028197
12.6± 0.6
7.33±0.47 7.63±0.38 4.44±0.25 0.53±0.20
18292927+0029121
15.0± 0.8
7.12±0.44 7.56±0.38 3.97±0.22 0.48±0.21
18292958+0114076
160± 8
92.8± 4.6
75.0± 3.6 44.6± 2.2 4.82±0.47
18292968+0113132
131± 6
81.8± 4.0
58.1± 2.8 34.6± 1.7 3.37±0.35
18292993+0032007 5.70±0.39
3.37±0.25 3.33±0.20 2.15±0.12
< 0.95
18293046+0024411 7.15±0.44
4.58±0.25 3.68±0.21 2.19±0.12
< 0.99
18293057+0033377 2.84±0.18
2.26±0.14 2.47±0.16 3.34±0.17 6.73±0.64

70μm
(mJy)
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

– 73 –

D153
D152
D151
K126
D154
D155
P04
K132
D157
D156
K134
D159
D158
D160
K140
D161
D162
K144
K145
D163
D165
D166

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

18293057+0024559
71.8± 4.9
18293083+0101072
38.8± 1.9
18293103+0025073
24.6± 1.5
18293106+0115216
31.2± 1.6
18293119+0105515 9.82±0.51
18293172+0108205
34.2± 1.7
18293191+0118345
137± 6
18293195+0118429
481± 24
18293201+0032348 6.06±0.38
18293260+0109502
68.7± 3.3
18293306+0117164
40.5± 2.2
18293336+0108245
85.6± 4.9
18293342+0022487
10.3± 0.6
18293355+0029030
17.9± 0.9
18293358+0106599
11.2± 0.5
18293444+0106067 5.50±0.28
18293447+0029322
12.3± 0.6
18293450+0031497
15.9± 1.0
18293473+0105289
21.2± 1.0
18293490+0034055 8.93±0.59
18293514+0123390 0.45±0.02
18293536+0024147 0.010±0.005

4.5μm
(mJy)
42.5± 2.8
35.2± 1.8
16.0± 1.0
19.5± 0.9
6.42±0.31
22.2± 1.1
101± 5
786± 42
3.57±0.25
42.2± 2.1
26.1± 1.3
72.3± 4.1
7.01±0.36
9.87±0.62
7.31±0.35
3.69±0.18
6.39±0.42
9.94±0.68
14.2± 0.7
6.68±0.39
0.53±0.03
< 0.034

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

38.5± 2.2 23.0± 1.3 2.08±0.25
***
27.6± 1.3 30.7± 1.6 54.3± 5.0
***
12.7± 0.7 7.74±0.43 0.68±0.22
***
14.0± 0.7 8.83±0.43
< 1.50
***
4.55±0.24 2.71±0.14
< 1.12
***
14.6± 0.7 8.44±0.43 0.94±0.26
***
107± 10 94.8±16.9
< 161
***
1140± 57 1830± 138 4370± 407 5190± 501
3.24±0.20 2.14±0.12
< 0.96
***
31.2± 1.5 18.7± 0.9 1.53±0.22
***
18.8± 0.9 10.9± 0.5
< 1.74
***
75.6± 3.6
116± 6
148± 13
320± 37
5.04±0.29 3.24±0.17
< 1.08
***
9.31±0.47 5.27±0.29 0.62±0.20
***
5.12±0.26 3.09±0.16
< 1.08
***
2.60±0.14 1.59±0.09
< 1.33
***
6.06±0.31 3.47±0.19
< 0.99
***
8.55±0.51 5.75±0.31 0.55±0.20
***
9.75±0.47 6.06±0.29 0.89±0.20
***
5.56±0.33 3.46±0.23
< 0.88
***
0.60±0.04 1.42±0.08 3.13±0.38
***
< 0.22
< 0.21
< 0.96
***

– 74 –

D164
K150
D167
K153
P05
K158
K160
K159
D168
K166
P06
K173
D170
D169
P07
P09
D172
D171
P08
D173
P10
D174

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

18293551+0024262 0.37±0.02
0.25±0.02 0.14±0.04
< 0.24
< 0.94
***
18293561+0035038
30.5± 2.0
24.1± 1.4
17.0± 1.0
12.8± 0.7
74.2± 6.9 57.6±13.1
18293604+0035233
10.9± 0.7
8.07±0.46 6.37±0.37 4.12±0.21
< 0.98
***
18293629+0027058
21.0± 1.1
11.3± 0.7
11.0± 0.5
6.61±0.35 0.62±0.20
***
18293686+0024171 0.39±0.04
0.28±0.02 0.23±0.04 0.096±0.033
< 0.95
***
18293712+0031033 2.93±0.15
1.54±0.11 1.36±0.08 0.86±0.06
< 0.99
***
18293713+0027007
75.7± 4.2
42.0± 2.7
44.1± 2.2
25.6± 1.4
3.38±0.34
***
18293716+0029526
21.7± 1.1
10.2± 0.7
9.91±0.50 5.74±0.30 0.56±0.21
***
18293721+0038386 7.09±0.56
6.56±0.33 4.26±0.29 3.07±0.15
< 0.96
***
18293747+0109109
524± 27
298± 16
252± 13
140± 7
16.9± 1.6
***
18293758+0111174
200± 10
139± 7
110± 5
70.4± 3.8
13.7± 1.3
***
18293767+0111299
156± 8
103± 5
84.2± 4.0
56.3± 2.9
21.4± 2.0
***
18293804+0100340
171± 8
102± 5
80.0± 3.8
46.8± 2.4
5.08±0.50
***
18293859+0023210
14.2± 0.9
10.8± 0.5
7.64±0.44 5.09±0.25 0.45±0.20
***
18293914+0036584 0.093±0.012 0.077±0.010
< 0.22
< 0.26
< 0.98
***
18293955+0028263
38.6± 2.0
19.5± 1.2
18.5± 0.9
10.8± 0.6
1.04±0.18
***
18293986+0117561
11.9± 0.6
10.5± 0.5
9.98±0.49
11.7± 0.6
18.4± 1.7
***
18294094+0112387
95.1± 4.8
62.6± 3.2
52.3± 2.5
27.9± 1.5
2.97±0.37
***
18294102+0120585
148± 7
81.7± 4.1
65.1± 3.1
38.6± 1.9
4.18±0.43
***
18294146+0107380
95.4± 4.8
83.2± 4.1
72.2± 3.4
81.0± 4.3
147± 13
***
18294152+0110043
33.2± 1.6
21.2± 1.0
16.5± 0.8
11.0± 0.6
7.69±0.75
***
18294216+0120211 7.27±0.42
6.13±0.30 7.00±0.35
13.0± 0.6
19.9± 1.9
***

– 75 –

D175
D176
D177
D178
D182
D181
D179
D180
D183
K184
K189
K190
K191
D184
D186
D185
P11 K202
K208
K209
P12 K207
K210
K216

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

18294392+0107208 18.4± 0.9 17.8± 0.9 16.1± 0.8 13.3± 0.6
10.1± 1.0
***
18294430+0104534 2530± 276 3920± 263 5010± 272 5040± 401 5840± 1750
655± 65
18294452+0113115 9.59±0.46 7.78±0.38 6.62±0.32 7.86±0.38
10.8± 1.0
***
18294474+0115407 2.99±0.15 2.07±0.10 1.85±0.10 1.08±0.07
< 1.78
***
18294506+0118472 238± 12
164± 8
138± 6
78.8± 4.2
8.20±0.78
***
18294598+0116240 14.8± 0.7 11.2± 0.5 9.60±0.46 5.70±0.28
< 3.00
***
18294623+0113473 12.5± 0.6 9.48±0.46 7.94±0.39 4.70±0.23
< 1.32
***
18294624+0112134 16.6± 0.8 10.3± 0.5 7.41±0.36 4.51±0.22
< 1.29
***
18294683+0116084 3.66±0.18 4.17±0.20 3.96±0.20 2.36±0.12
< 10.0
***
18294700+0116268 11.0± 0.6 15.2± 0.8 18.6± 0.9 19.3± 0.9
42.2± 4.1
***
18294723+0122346 33.0± 1.6 21.7± 1.1 15.7± 0.8 9.28±0.62
0.78±0.27
***
18294760+0105075 2290± 215 2140± 134 1930± 97 1100± 64
111± 10
***
18294810+0116449 1.96±0.10 6.98±0.42 12.1± 0.6 16.7± 0.8
219± 21
14900± 1420
18294878+0113422 5.08±0.25 5.17±0.25 5.12±0.25 5.22±0.25
6.24±0.63
***
18294898+0111443
113± 5
67.6± 3.3 52.6± 2.5 31.0± 1.5
3.02±0.41
***
18294905+0058520 53.1± 2.6 34.4± 1.7 28.4± 1.4 17.8± 0.9
2.09±0.31
***
18294913+0116198 12.0± 1.0 72.6± 5.4
221± 12
602± 33 6640± 1990 18300± 1790
18294914+0112596 3.84±0.19 2.77±0.14 2.08±0.11 1.11±0.07
< 1.52
***
18294924+0116314 16.8± 0.8 36.9± 1.8 65.2± 3.1
101± 5
1360± 218
***
18294957+0117060 42.5± 2.1 95.8± 4.8
143± 6
184± 13
526± 48
***
18294963+0115219 0.85±0.08 2.64±0.27 2.32±0.28 3.54±0.31 1180± 117 82800± 7810
18294969+0114568 13.8± 0.7 39.0± 2.0 66.6± 3.2 74.3± 3.8
132± 12
***

– 76 –

K219
K221
K224 EC011
K226
K228
K231 EC021
EC022
K232 EC023
K234
K237 EC028
P13
K238
K241
K242 EC033
K243
K244
K250
EC036
K249
K254 EC038
K258a EC041
K253

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

18294994+0115190 0.053±0.014
< 2.50
3.78±0.35 5.90±0.43 336± 50
***
18295015+0056081
29.5± 1.4
28.4± 1.4 28.0± 1.3 31.3± 1.5 48.7± 4.6
***
18295021+0109152
375± 23
197± 10
172± 8
96.8± 5.0 11.2± 1.1
***
18295054+0114169 0.085±0.025 0.32±0.03 0.36±0.10 0.43±0.06 1.20±0.48
***
18295058+0101329 0.46±0.02 0.34±0.02 0.29±0.04
< 1.31
< 4.26
***
18295114+0116406
31.1± 2.6
72.6± 4.6
141± 7
208± 10
992± 92
8480± 805
18295117+0113197 2.44±0.12 1.93±0.10 1.75±0.10 1.87±0.10 2.37±0.39
***
18295169+0056173
37.0± 1.8
25.3± 1.2 18.3± 0.9 10.7± 0.5 0.94±0.19
***
18295199+0110323
137± 7
80.8± 4.0 64.9± 3.1 37.8± 1.9 3.92±0.42
***
18295213+0113219 2.81±0.14 2.11±0.10 1.59±0.09 0.99±0.07
< 1.50
***
18295219+0115478 7.38±0.41
33.0± 2.1 41.3± 2.2 40.0± 2.6 1640± 154 15200± 1420
18295249+0112467 8.56±0.42 6.26±0.31 5.48±0.27 3.15±0.16
< 1.29
***
18295285+0114560 8.65±0.44
34.6± 1.8 72.0± 3.4
110± 5
1040± 96
5570± 523
18295301+0104351
77.3± 4.0
46.2± 2.3 38.2± 1.8 22.5± 1.1 2.24±0.33
***
18295316+0112277 1.20±0.06 1.18±0.06 1.17±0.07 1.43±0.08 1.18±0.22
***
18295317+0115457 8.78±0.42
10.8± 0.6 13.5± 0.7 8.29±0.43
< 35.4
***
18295355+0113051 1.89±0.09 1.56±0.08 1.30±0.08 1.07±0.07 0.82±0.36
***
18295359+0117018
41.1± 2.0
38.9± 1.9 33.6± 1.6 33.0± 1.6 26.7± 2.5
***
18295383+0113306 5.31±0.26 5.24±0.25 5.40±0.27 5.39±0.26 6.05±0.65
***
18295407+0107109 5.59±0.27 5.79±0.28 5.32±0.27 5.95±0.29 11.0± 1.0
***
18295426+0117468
57.9± 2.8
40.7± 2.0 37.3± 1.8 21.1± 1.0
< 1.76
***
18295432+0115017
35.0± 1.7
25.5± 1.2 22.1± 1.0 13.2± 0.6 2.98±0.54
***

– 77 –

K258b
K252
K255
K260
K259
P14 K265 EC053
K266 EC051
K264
K267
K269
K270
K272 EC059
K276
K271
EC064
K277
K279
P15 K283 EC067
K285 EC068
K287
K290
K289 EC069

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

Table 4-Continued
Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

K291
K294 EC073
P16
P17 K298 EC074
K296
P18 K300
P19
EC077
EC081
K304 EC079
K306 EC080
K308
K307 EC082
EC083
K309 EC084
P20 EC086
K313
K311
K312 EC088
P21
EC089
P22 K314 EC090

18295452+0114469
18295518+0113224
18295536+0110340
18295569+0114315
18295603+0104146
18295606+0100229
18295618+0110574
18295635+0112180
18295638+0113331
18295655+0112595
18295667+0112392
18295671+0113206
18295687+0114465
18295695+0116085
18295696+0112477
18295740+0114502
18295750+0113491
18295756+0110471
18295758+0113005
18295764+0110536

3.73±0.18
14.6± 0.7
2.98±0.14
63.5± 3.2
353± 19
182± 10
9.06±0.46
1.74±0.09
0.17±0.03
25.4± 1.2
16.3± 0.8
0.31±0.06
581± 30
0.45±0.03
31.3± 1.5
22.7± 1.3
16.8± 1.1
67.1± 3.5
66.1± 3.2
181± 9

2.69±0.13
14.8± 0.7
2.02±0.10
92.3± 4.7
214± 11
130± 6
5.90±0.29
1.23±0.06
0.11±0.04
26.9± 1.3
35.9± 1.8
2.36±0.14
688± 36
0.31±0.03
29.7± 1.4
14.9± 0.9
28.3± 2.2
44.7± 2.1
175± 8
117± 5

1.96±0.12
13.8± 0.7
1.41±0.08
121± 5
188± 9
84.5± 4.1
3.92±0.20
0.91±0.06
< 0.33
28.0± 1.3
37.4± 1.8
1.70±0.11
822± 41
0.24±0.05
30.0± 1.4
14.4± 1.0
29.2± 2.2
28.1± 1.4
251± 11
71.9± 3.4

1.23±0.09
15.6± 0.8
0.75±0.06
134± 6
109± 5
48.2± 2.5
2.52±0.13
0.38±0.07
< 0.34
29.4± 1.5
30.9± 1.5
1.97±0.25
1580± 86
< 0.56
25.9± 1.4
10.0± 1.1
27.8± 2.3
16.9± 0.8
289± 15
40.9± 2.0

< 2.64
74.7± 6.9
< 1.33
229± 21
14.9± 1.4
4.28±0.93
0.87±0.31
< 2.40
< 13.1
49.1± 5.1
36.8± 4.0
< 9.45
4280± 406
< 3.01
14.2± 6.2
< 365
< 229
2.00±0.31
1990± 191
4.63±0.48

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
19700± 1880
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

18295772+0114057 2480± 189 2970± 279 5100± 375 5360± 384 7860± 2350 26000± 2440

– 78 –

Sourcea

Table 4-Continued
Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

P24 K319 EC093
K320 EC091
P23 K317 EC092
K318 EC094
EC095
P25 K321 EC097
K324
K322 EC098
EC100
K326 EC103
K327
P26 K328 EC105
K330
K334
K331
EC114
K332
K339
K337 EC118
P27 K338 EC117
EC120
K341 EC121

18295780+0115318
18295780+0112279
18295783+0112514
18295784+0112378
18295789+0112462
18295819+0115218
18295829+0120270
18295844+0112501
18295872+0116207
18295877+0114262
18295902+0112251
18295923+0114077
18295956+0111590
18295978+0121561
18295992+0113116
18300019+0114036
18300030+0109447
18300055+0119402
18300061+0115204
18300065+0113402
18300107+0116498
18300109+0113244

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

65.0± 3.2 68.4± 3.2 59.3± 2.8 52.6± 2.6 86.2± 9.9
***
14.1± 0.7 20.6± 1.0 20.2± 1.0 17.2± 0.9 22.9± 5.0
***
108± 5
167± 8
222± 10
361± 19 2860± 285
***
40.1± 2.0 55.9± 2.7 61.1± 2.9 61.6± 3.2 84.2± 9.8
***
131± 6
160± 7
181± 8
180± 10
388± 50
***
153± 9
181± 9
170± 8
194± 10
525± 49
***
52.5± 2.7 34.1± 1.6 24.0± 1.2 14.6± 0.7 1.42±0.24
***
16.5± 1.0 17.4± 0.9 15.5± 0.8 13.0± 0.7 96.9±41.9
***
19.4± 1.0 13.8± 0.7 9.73±0.49 5.92±0.29
< 1.54
***
49.2± 2.6 90.8± 4.6
134± 6
143± 8
620± 58
***
2.38±0.14 3.66±0.18 4.83±0.25 6.20±0.31 28.4± 2.8
***
179± 11
201± 12
215± 12
182± 23
119± 25
***
80.2± 5.1 261± 15
414± 21
483± 28 1720± 161
***
553± 30
296± 15
245± 12
141± 7
15.3± 1.4
***
2.77±0.16 29.5± 1.5
103± 4
199± 10 2620± 249 6830± 675
8.71±0.43 9.51±0.47 9.34±0.56 15.0± 0.8 36.3± 3.8
***
18.3± 0.9 47.3± 2.4 75.6± 3.6 82.7± 4.3 78.8± 7.3
***
219± 11
123± 6
96.7± 4.6 56.0± 2.8 5.78±0.56
***
587± 35
464± 24
590± 29
339± 20
< 27.8
***
42.7± 2.2 31.0± 1.6 23.7± 1.1 13.7± 0.7 3.20±1.43
***
0.95±0.05 0.70±0.04 0.51±0.05 0.19±0.05
< 1.29
***
10.3± 0.5 13.9± 0.7 13.6± 0.7 13.0± 0.6 56.9± 5.4
***

– 79 –

Sourcea

Table 4-Continued
Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

P28
K342
K345 EC125
K347 EC129
EC131
P29 K348 EC135
EC137
EC138
K349
K351
EC142
P30
EC149
EC152
EC160 EC161
P32 K357
P31 K359
P33
P34 K366
P35
K372
K367

18300124+0115036
18300162+0059300
18300208+0113589
18300273+0112282
18300278+0113219
18300339+0116194
18300359+0116408
18300368+0116143
18300370+0104492
18300374+0112400
18300387+0116094
18300453+0122335
18300490+0114395
18300501+0112360
18300585+0113483
18300608+0106171
18300640+0101058
18300677+0112101
18300769+0112046
18300820+0105510
18300844+0055257
18300849+0101374

8.90±0.45
108± 6
15.7± 0.8
238± 12
0.62±0.04
39.7± 2.0
2.50±0.13
3.16±0.16
257± 13
8.41±0.42
4.79±0.24
0.18±0.01
6.57±0.33
2.48±0.12
9.62±0.47
19.0± 1.0
41.7± 2.0
0.88±0.04
80.2± 4.1
5.25±0.26
188± 9
15.9± 0.8

6.47±0.33
68.8± 3.4
21.9± 1.1
369± 18
0.46±0.03
34.5± 1.7
2.58±0.13
2.54±0.12
145± 7
5.88±0.31
4.09±0.20
0.18±0.01
5.71±0.28
2.38±0.12
7.44±0.36
16.8± 0.8
41.2± 2.0
0.62±0.04
76.1± 3.9
3.55±0.18
113± 5
16.0± 0.8

5.09±0.29
53.7± 2.6
27.6± 1.3
497± 23
0.25±0.05
32.4± 1.5
2.31±0.12
1.71±0.12
134± 6
4.92±0.26
3.56±0.19
0.24±0.04
5.15±0.26
2.28±0.12
6.06±0.29
15.2± 0.7
40.2± 1.9
0.50±0.04
77.2± 3.7
2.55±0.13
91.1± 4.3
12.7± 0.6

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

3.24±0.17
< 2.24
***
30.4± 1.6 3.51±0.40
***
34.6± 1.7
167± 15
***
551± 30 1910± 178 5230± 488
< 0.29
< 2.80
***
53.2± 2.7
112± 10
***
2.34±0.12 3.91±0.48
***
1.27±0.08
< 4.76
***
77.4± 4.0
< 3.93
***
2.92±0.18
< 3.06
***
2.21±0.12
< 3.1
***
0.34±0.04 0.87±0.20
***
5.53±0.27 4.26±0.46
***
2.33±0.12 3.32±0.42
***
3.58±0.18
< 1.70
***
19.1± 0.9 36.6± 3.4
***
49.6± 2.5 66.3± 6.1
***
0.32±0.04
< 2.55
***
81.4± 4.2
124± 11
363± 42
1.58±0.09
< 1.53
***
51.9± 2.6 6.80±0.65
***
15.2± 0.7 39.4± 3.7
***

– 80 –

Sourcea

Table 4-Continued
Sourcea

3.6μm
(mJy)

4.5μm
(mJy)

5.8μm
(mJy)

8.0μm
(mJy)

24μm
(mJy)

70μm
(mJy)

18300861+0058466
63.6± 3.1
52.2± 2.6
47.7± 2.4
73.1± 4.1 229± 21 303± 31
18300883+0055151
309± 23
188± 10
146± 7
83.4± 4.4 10.4± 1.0
***
18300894+0114443
151± 7
95.5± 4.9
81.7± 4.0
48.1± 2.4 5.86±0.60
***
18300921+0117526 8.35±0.41
8.15±0.40
7.34±0.38 7.15±0.37 9.83±0.93
***
18300942+0102473
280± 14
179± 9
151± 7
107± 5
51.1± 4.7
***
18300986+0124398 0.045±0.005 0.034±0.013 0.057±0.027
< 0.34
< 2.14
***
18301035+0119355
64.7± 4.0
41.9± 2.2
26.7± 1.3
16.0± 0.8 1.50±0.27
***
18301109+0112382 9.72±0.48
9.13±0.45
9.71±0.47
12.9± 0.6 18.4± 1.7
***
18301206+0116424
146± 7
112± 5
79.6± 3.8
46.8± 2.3 4.66±0.49
***
18301395+0108515 5.38±0.29
4.09±0.20
3.55±0.18 3.89±0.20 7.48±0.73
***
18301475+0106166
70.1± 3.5
39.9± 2.0
30.2± 1.4
18.4± 0.9 1.97±0.31
***
18301491+0105189
50.6± 2.5
31.6± 1.5
22.4± 1.1
13.7± 0.7 0.92±0.23
***
18301816+0114169
18.7± 1.0
20.3± 1.0
22.7± 1.1
34.6± 1.7 111± 10
***
18302190+0121076 4.64±0.23
3.09±0.16
2.05±0.13 0.86±0.09
< 2.88
***
18302239+0120440 6.71±0.34
4.79±0.24
3.65±0.19 2.52±0.14 8.56±0.84
***
18302342+0105047
14.5± 0.7
13.9± 0.7
13.4± 0.7
15.2± 0.7 56.9± 5.3
***
18302613+0109257 0.12±0.01
0.11±0.01
0.10±0.03
< 0.33
< 1.58
***
18303533+0105576 8.36±0.41
5.34±0.26
3.70±0.18 2.23±0.12
< 2.39
***
18303741+0117582
17.6± 0.9
10.9± 0.5
7.57±0.37 4.35±0.23
***
***
18303953+0118030
11.1± 0.6
7.12±0.34
4.95±0.25 2.90±0.16
***
***
18304022+0110149 0.23±0.02
0.15±0.01
0.12±0.04
< 0.29
***
***

– 81 –

K370
K375
K378
K382
K379
P36
K389
K393
K401
K407
K410
K409
P37
P38
P39
P40
P41
P42
P43
P44
P45

Spitzer
SSTc2dJ...

a

Source numbers from the following catalogs: EC, Eiroa & Casali (1992); D, Djupvik et al. (2006); P,
Preibisch (2003), K, Kaas et al. (2004).

– 82 –

– 83 –

Table 5. Average/Std Dev of Spectral Slope α Versus Luminosity of YSO's
Luminosity Range

Average α

σα

< 0.02 L⊙
0.02 − −1.0 L⊙
> 1.0 L⊙

-0.73
-0.70
-0.60

1.47
1.04
.74

Table 6. Numbers, Densities, Star Formation Rates
Region

Area

N(YSOs)
(pc2 )

N/Ω
(deg−2 )

Cluster A
Cluster B
Rest of Cloud
All of Cloud

0.20
0.14
17.2
17.5

44
17
174
235

4580
2450
209
276

N/Area N/Vol
SFR
−2
−3
(pc ) (pc ) (M⊙ Myr−1 )

222
119
10.1
13.4

500
315
2.5
3.2

11
4.3
44
59

SFR/Area
(M⊙ Myr−1 pc−2 )

56
30
2.5
3.4

– 84 –

Table 7. Disk Modeling Results in Class II Sources
Star

SED Type

AV

Lstar

Ldisk /Lstar

λturn−off

αexcess

1
3
5
7
9
10
11
13
14
18
19
20
25
27
28
29
30
31
33
35
38
39
47
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58

L
T
T
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
LU
L
T
L
L
L
L
T
L
L
T
T
LU
T
L
L
L
T
T
L
T
L
T

2.9
4.6
4.9
3.8
6.6
9.9
8.4
2.8
6.6
10.8
12.6
14.3
4.8
4.0
15.7
12.7
8.3
10.4
10.2
7.4
18.9
5.1
14.5
5.4
18.4
7.4
10.0
10.5
9.3
23.3
10.4
12.0
6.1

0.33
1.06
1.64
0.09
0.91
0.05
0.07
0.19
1.03
0.07
0.33
0.09
0.09
0.54
67.31
0.14
33.93
0.02
5.58
0.03
0.05
0.21
0.02
0.13
1.31
0.57
0.29
0.12
3.14
2.50
1.06
0.06
1.94

0.088
0.330
0.165
0.110
0.141
0.190
0.186
0.084
0.182
0.098
0.073
0.160
0.159
0.112
0.197
0.253
0.291
0.454
0.111
0.113
0.588
0.104
0.247
0.141
0.201
0.155
0.148
0.305
0.409
0.198
0.306
0.146
0.147

5.8
2.2
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6
2.2
5.8
3.6
3.6
3.6
2.2
3.6
3.6
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
3.6
2.2
5.8
4.5
3.6
3.6
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
3.6

-0.7
-0.8
-0.5
-1.0
-0.8
-1.3
-1.2
-1.0
-0.7
-1.1
-0.4
-1.4
-0.9
-1.4
-1.8
-1.3
-1.5
-1.1
-2.0
-1.2
-1.1
-0.4
-0.6
-0.9
-1.0
-1.2
-1.1
-0.7
-0.8
-1.4
-0.8
-1.6
-0.6

– 85 –

Table 7-Continued
Star

SED Type

AV

Lstar

Ldisk /Lstar

λturn−off

αexcess

59
62
64
66
69
70
71
72
76
77
78
79
80
82
84
86
87
89
92
94
96
97
98
100
102
103
106
108
110
111
113
114
116

L
L
L
L
T
L
T
L
L
L
LU
L
L
L
L
T
T
L
L
L
L
T
T
L
L
T
L
T
LU
LU
L
L
L

8.8
8.9
11.0
4.1
15.2
3.8
5.3
3.9
25.2
15.0
4.3
13.9
3.0
3.5
9.7
10.9
6.5
9.1
9.1
5.4
13.4
19.4
11.1
22.4
4.5
5.4
9.2
0.0
5.0
6.2
5.3
7.4
8.8

6.11
2.81
0.11
0.14
0.52
0.04
0.07
0.13
76.59
29.56
0.09
0.15
0.04
0.04
0.58
0.31
0.14
0.53
0.92
0.15
0.13
0.42
0.01
46.34
0.09
0.47
0.20
1.34
0.67
0.28
0.02
0.22
0.09

0.267
0.205
0.062
0.054
0.188
0.088
0.123
0.154
0.099
0.154
0.049
0.106
0.087
0.101
0.145
0.210
0.224
0.079
0.091
0.158
0.092
0.186
0.863
0.218
0.125
0.155
0.058
0.137
0.071
0.244
0.136
0.157
0.108

2.2
2.2
3.6
5.8
3.6
5.8
3.6
3.6
4.5
3.6
8.0
4.5
5.8
5.8
2.2
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6
4.5
3.6
2.2
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6
5.8
8.0
3.6
3.6
2.2
3.6

-1.2
-1.0
-0.9
-0.5
-1.2
-1.6
-0.6
-1.0
-2.1
-1.9
0.9
-1.4
-1.0
-1.2
-2.1
-0.4
-0.0
-0.9
-1.5
-1.0
-1.3
-1.0
-1.2
-1.6
-1.3
-0.9
-0.9
-0.5
-0.4
-0.4
-1.2
-1.2
-1.4

– 86 –

Table 7-Continued
Star

SED Type

AV

Lstar

117
119
120
121
123
124
125
127
128
129
130
132
133
134
136
144
145
147
153
156
158
159
160
162
163
164
167
168
169
172
173
174
177

L
L
T
T
L
T
L
L
L
L
L
LU
L
LU
T
T
L
L
L
L
T
L
L
L
L
T
L
T
T
T
L
T
L

9.2
5.7
9.3
6.2
1.7
2.4
8.0
12.4
3.6
9.8
2.6
3.3
6.4
0.0
15.8
9.5
8.8
11.1
19.6
5.2
8.6
5.5
8.4
7.4
14.0
8.9
6.3
17.0
7.3
3.9
15.0
14.2
7.5

0.21
0.16
0.01
1.32
0.35
0.10
0.26
118.71
0.15
0.36
0.12
0.10
0.25
0.15
0.05
0.46
0.75
0.05
0.09
0.08
0.13
0.08
0.02
0.73
0.12
0.05
0.12
0.40
5.39
0.09
0.15
0.49
5.42

Ldisk /Lstar

λturn−off

αexcess

0.147
0.073
0.241
0.144
0.078
0.183
0.153
0.131
0.092
0.078
0.108
0.075
0.070
0.053
0.656
0.191
0.095
0.105
0.240
0.108
0.175
0.172
0.178
0.108
0.165
0.379
0.095
0.193
0.285
0.223
0.375
0.229
0.151

3.6
5.8
2.2
3.6
5.8
5.8
2.2
3.6
5.8
3.6
5.8
5.8
5.8
8.0
2.2
2.2
3.6
3.6
2.2
3.6
2.2
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6
2.2
3.6
4.5
2.2
3.6
2.2
3.6
3.6

-0.9
-0.9
-1.1
-0.8
-0.3
-0.4
-1.5
-1.7
-0.7
-1.0
-1.3
0.1
-0.5
0.4
-1.1
-1.0
-1.5
-1.1
-1.3
-0.9
-1.0
-1.1
-1.1
-1.4
-1.3
-0.8
-0.9
-0.9
-0.7
-0.9
-1.2
-1.1
-1.7

– 87 –

Table 7-Continued
Star

SED Type

AV

Lstar

Ldisk /Lstar

λturn−off

αexcess

178
180
183
189
193
194
199
202
205
206
209
210
211
213
214
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
224
226
227
228
229
230
232
235

L
L
L
L
L
L
LU
T
T
L
T
L
T
L
LU
L
L
LU
T
T
T
T
T
T
L
T
L
L
T
T
T

9.6
4.6
24.4
5.4
2.9
7.7
6.7
15.1
11.5
5.0
5.9
4.3
16.7
3.2
9.6
3.3
7.5
4.5
4.9
6.8
7.4
5.7
3.4
8.9
5.6
2.7
3.1
3.4
7.7
8.6
4.4

1.76
0.04
2.44
0.16
0.05
1.72
0.14
0.09
0.09
0.30
0.65
0.18
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.09
0.03
0.09
0.27
0.60
0.99
0.19
0.65
0.08
0.03
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.02
0.52
0.16

0.218
0.087
0.192
0.127
0.113
0.305
0.098
0.352
0.188
0.088
0.155
0.095
0.297
0.082
0.119
0.105
0.175
0.050
0.139
0.184
0.259
0.187
0.332
0.289
0.081
0.331
0.078
0.081
0.156
0.141
0.225

2.2
5.8
2.2
3.6
5.8
2.2
5.8
2.2
2.2
3.6
3.6
3.6
2.2
5.8
3.6
5.8
3.6
8.0
3.6
3.6
2.2
3.6
3.6
2.2
3.6
3.6
5.8
5.8
3.6
3.6
3.6

-1.4
-1.2
-1.4
-1.0
-0.4
-1.3
0.4
-1.3
-0.9
-0.9
-0.5
-1.0
-1.1
-1.4
-0.6
-1.2
-1.0
0.5
-0.7
-0.8
-0.7
-0.6
-0.4
-1.0
-1.4
-0.7
-0.9
-0.5
-0.5
-0.2
-0.3

– 88 –

– 89 –

Table 8. Disk Modeling Results in Class III Sources
Star

SED Type

AV

Lstar

Ldisk /Lstar

λturn−off

αexcess

2
4
12
15
16
17
21
48
65
73
74
81
83
85
90
91
93
95
101
105
107
109
112
115
122
126
140
143
148
161
165
170
192

L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
LU
L
L
L
L
L
LU
L
L
LU
L
L
L
L

6.3
7.6
9.1
7.7
10.8
11.1
11.7
2.5
0.0
7.5
0.0
8.7
8.0
7.2
7.7
8.5
16.7
8.5
8.6
0.7
8.3
10.7
7.4
9.7
9.6
3.3
8.8
4.2
0.0
11.2
0.7
3.7
8.1

19.19
2.50
8.76
2.02
31.18
2.69
2.16
1.13
0.70
3.06
0.60
9.23
28.57
1.66
3.50
3.55
38.30
23.79
6.09
11.61
15.02
7.62
0.24
3.90
0.96
0.36
2.25
0.21
0.67
4.26
0.94
0.07
0.20

0.013
0.028
0.015
0.025
0.041
0.036
0.038
0.054
0.016
0.022
0.010
0.021
0.034
0.048
0.034
0.020
0.051
0.015
0.074
0.010
0.055
0.037
0.018
0.044
0.028
0.062
0.032
0.052
0.017
0.032
0.014
0.079
0.034

24.0
24.0
24.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
24.0
8.0
24.0
8.0
5.8
8.0
24.0
8.0
24.0
5.8
24.0
5.8
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
5.8
24.0
8.0
8.0
5.8
8.0

-99.0
-99.0
-99.0
-1.9
-2.3
-2.1
-2.0
0.6
-0.9
-99.0
-1.3
-99.0
-1.6
-1.5
-2.3
-99.0
-2.2
-99.0
-2.2
1.2
-2.3
-2.3
-1.9
-2.1
-1.5
0.3
-2.2
-1.3
2.3
-2.2
-1.6
-1.3
-0.5

– 90 –

Table 8-Continued
Star

SED Type

AV

Lstar

Ldisk /Lstar

λturn−off

αexcess

212
223
225
231
233
234

L
LU
L
L
L
L

3.5
3.5
9.3
7.5
2.1
1.9

0.07
0.11
7.38
10.29
0.11
0.08

0.062
0.025
0.036
0.025
0.038
0.022

5.8
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

-1.5
0.4
-1.9
-2.2
0.1
-0.1

Table 9. The Coldest YSO's (F70 /F24 > 8)
ID
Tbl 2

3.6 μm
(mJy)

4.5 μm
(mJy)

5.8 μm
(mJy)

8.0 μm
(mJy)

24.0 μm
(mJy)

18285404+0029299
18285486+0029525
18285808+0017244
18290211+0031206
18290675+0030343
18293254−0013233
18294810+0116449
18294963+0115219
18295114+0116406
18295130+0027479
18295219+0115478
18295252+0036117
18295430+0036013
18295927+0114016
18300070+0113014

5.81±0.50
1.94±0.12
52.5± 3.0
1.19±0.07
3.27±0.21
654± 39
1.96±0.10
0.85±0.08
31.1± 2.6
33.8± 2.0
7.38±0.41
2.49±0.14
2.39±0.25
2.72±0.28
0.38±0.04

27.6± 2.3
10.6± 0.6
36.7± 2.5
1.62±0.09
11.7± 0.7
370± 19
6.98±0.42
2.64±0.27
72.6± 4.6
22.3± 1.3
33.0± 2.1
4.24±0.23
6.57±0.42
5.76±0.44
1.23±0.10

44.8± 2.6
20.4± 1.1
31.2± 1.7
1.58±0.10
14.9± 0.8
276± 13
12.1± 0.6
2.32±0.28
141± 7
16.2± 0.9
41.3± 2.2
5.18±0.28
7.32±0.44
7.78±1.16
2.08±0.16

56.4± 3.2
30.2± 1.6
28.5± 1.7
1.13±0.07
20.7± 1.2
156± 8
16.7± 0.8
3.54±0.31
208± 10
10.1± 0.6
40.0± 2.6
6.55±0.36
5.80±0.31
36.0± 5.4
3.55±0.21

918± 85
765± 70
9.74±0.92
22.1± 2.0
1000± 105
39.7± 3.7
219± 21
1180± 117
992± 92
4.81±0.50
1640± 154
100± 9
16.0± 1.5
109± 19
95.8±11.4

70.0 μm
(mJy)
11100±
7250±
1040±
276±
11400±
429±
14900±
82800±
8480±
163±
15200±
1910±
1270±
12200±
8640±

1040
675
101
29
1180
47
1420
7810
805
18
1420
179
121
1160
829

– 91 –

40
42
48
60
68
105
135
141
146
148
150
154
166
195
203

Name/Position
SSTc2dJ...

– 92 –

Table 10. Probable High Velocity Outflows in Serpens
YSO ID

141
146
75

RA (J2000) Dec (J2000)
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18

29
29
30
30
30
29
29
29
29
29

18.8
47.7
22.7
22.6
02.6
38.5
56.6
49.6
51.2
09.0

+01
+01
+01
+01
+01
+01
+01
+01
+01
+00

14
25
16
16
14
18
15
15
16
31

15
52
18
05
45
26
37
21
41
30

Matching Name
HH 106A,B,E
HH 107A
HH 455A
HH 455B,D
HH 459A,B
HH 460A,B,C,D
HH 478A,B
SMM 1
SMM 5

Comments

Jets to NW and SE
Jets to NW and SE
Jets to N and S

– 93 –
REFERENCES
Alcala, J. et al. 2007, ApJ, submitted
Allen, L. E. et al. 2004, ApJS, 154, 363
Allen, L. E. et al. 2004, "Protostars & Planets V", in press.
Baraffe, I., Chabrier, G., Allard, F. & Hauschildt, P.H. 1998, A&A, 337, 403
Baraffe, I., Chabrier, G., Allard, F. & Hauschildt, P.H. 2002, A&A, 382, 563
Bate, M.R., Clarke, C.J. & McCaughrean, M.J. 1998, MNRAS, 297, 1163
Blake, G. A. & Boogert, A. C. A. 2004, ApJ, 606, L73
Cambrésy, L. 1999 A & A, 345, 965
Casali, M.M., Eiroa, C. & Duncan, W.D. 1993, A&A, 275, 195
Chavarria-K., C., de Lara, E., Finkenzeller, U., Mendoza, E. E., & Ocegueda, J. 1988, A&A,
197, 151
Chen, C.H. et al. 2005, ApJ, 634, 1372
Cieza, L. et al. 2005, ApJ, 635, 422
Cieza, L. et al. 2006, ApJ, in press
Cohen, M. & Kuhi, L. V. 1979, ApJS, 41, 743
D'Alessio, P., Calvet, N., Hartmann, L., Lizano, S. & Canto, J. 1999, ApJ, 527, 893
D'Alessio, P. et al. 2005, ApJ, 621, 416
Davis, C.J., Matthews, H.E, Ray, T.P., Dent, W.R.F., & Richer, J.S. 1999, MNRAS, 309,
141
Djupvik, A.A., Andre,́ Ph., Bontemps, S., Motte, F., Olofsson, G., Galfalk, M. & Floren,
H.-G. 2006,A&A, in press.
Evans, N. J., II, et al. 2003, PASP, 115, 965
Eiroa, C. & Casali, M. M. 1992, A&A, 262, 468

– 94 –
Eiroa, C., Djupvik, A.A. & Casali, M.M. 2007, in Handbook of Star Forming Regions, (ASP
Conf. Series), ed. B. Reipurth, in press
Elmegreen, B.G., Efremov, Y., Pudritz, R.E. & Zinnecker, H. 2000, "Protostars & Planets
IV", U. Az. Press, p. 179
Enoch, M. L. et al. 2006, ApJ, 638, 293
Enoch, M. L. et al. 2006, ApJ, submitted
Evans, N. J., II et al. 2005, Second Delivery of Data ...: IRAC and MIPS,
http://data.spitzer.caltech.edu/popular/c2d/20050705 enhanced v1/Documents/
Evans, N. J., II et al. 2007, Final Delivery of Data ...: IRAC and MIPS,...
Gomez, M. & Lada, C.J. 1998, ApJ, 115, 1524
Greene, T. P., Wilking, B. A., André, P., Young, E. T. & Lada, C. J. 1994, ApJ, 434, 614
Hartmann, L., Megeath, S.T., Allen, L., Luhman, K., Calvet, N., D'Alessio, P., FrancoHernandez, R. & Fazio, G. 2005, ApJ, 629, 881
Harvey, P. M., Wilking, B. A., & Joy, M. 1984, ApJ, 300, 729
Harvey, P.M. et al. 2006, ApJ, 644, 307
Harvey, P.M. et al. 2007, ApJ, in press
Herbig, G. H. & Bell, K. R. 1988, Third Catalog of Emission-Line Stars of the Orion Population, http://www-int.stsci.edu/∼welty/HBC/HBCintro.html
Herbst, T. M., Beckwith, S. V. W., & Robberto, M. 1997, ApJ, L59
Hillenbrand, L. A., Strom, S. E., Vrba, F. J., & Keene, J. 1992, ApJ, 397, 613
Hillenbrand, L.A. & White, R.J. 2004, ApJ, 604, 741
Hodapp, K. W. 1999, AJ, 118, 1338
Hogerheijde, M. R., van Dishoeck, E. F., & Salverda, J. M. 1999, ApJ, 513, 350
Hora, J.L., Deutsch, L.K., Hoffmann, W.F. & Fazio, G.G. 1996, AJ, 112, 2064
Horrobin, M.J., Casali, M.M. & Eiroa, C. 1997, A&A, 320, L41
Huard, T. L. et al. 2006, ApJ, in press (astro-ph/0509302)

– 95 –
Huard, T. L., Weintraub, D. A., & Kastner, J. H. 1997, MNRAS, 290, 598
Hurt, R. L. & Barsony, M. 1996, ApJ, 460, L45
Indebetouw, R. et al. 2005, ApJ, 619, 931
Johnstone, D., Wilson, C.D., Moriarty-Schieven, G., Joncas, G., Smith, G., Gregersen, E. &
Fich, M. 2000, ApJ, 545, 327
Jorgensen, J.K. et al. 2006, ApJ, 645, 1246
Kaas, A. A. et al. 2004, A & A, 421, 623
Kenyon, S.J. & Hartmann, L. 1987, ApJ, 323, 714
Klotz, A., Caux, E., Monin, J.-L., & Lodieu, N. 2004, A&A, 425, 927
Koornneef, J. 1983, A&A, 128, 84
Lada, C. J. 1987, Star Forming Regions, M. Peimbert & J. Jugaku (eds.), IAU, 1
Lada, C. J., Alves, J., & Lada, E. A. 1999, in "The Physics and Chemistry of the Interstellar
Medium", eds. V. Ossenkopf, J. Stutzki, G. Winnewisser, 161
Lada, C.J. 2006, ApJ, 640, L63
Lada, C.J. et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 1574
Lai, S.-P. et al. 2006, in prep.
Li, W., Evans II, N. J., Harvey, P. M., & Colomé, C. 1994, ApJ, 433, 199 128, 84
Lodieu, N., Caux, E., Monin, J.-L. & Klotz, A.(2002), A&A, 383, L15
Maddox, S.J., Efstathiou, G., Sutherland, W.J. & Loveday, J. 1990, MNRAS, 242, 43p
Makovoz, D. & Marleau, F. R. 2005, PASP, 117, 1113
Merı́n, B. et al. 2007, in prep.
Muzerolle, J. et al.(2006), ApJ, 643, 1010
Noreiga-Crespo, A. et al. 2004, ApJS, 154, 352
Padgett, D.L. et al. 2004, ApJS, 154, 433
Pontoppidan, K. M. et al. 2006, in press.

– 96 –
Pontoppidan, K. M. et al. 2006, in press.
Preibisch, T. 2003, A&A, 410, 951
Press, W. H., Teukolsky, S. A., Vetterling, W. T., & Flannery, B. P. 1992, Numerical Recipes
in C, Cambridge Univ. Press
Rebull, L. et al.(2006), ApJ, in press
Robitaille, T.P., Whitney, B.A., Indebetouw, R., Wood, K. & Denzmore, P. 2007, ApJ, in
press
Schechter, P. L., Mateo, M., & Saha, A. 1993, PASP, 105, 1342
Simon, M. (1995), ApJ, 482, L81
Sivia, D. S. 1996, A Bayesian Tutorial, Clarendon Press
Smith, M. D. & Rosen, R. 2005, MNRAS, 357, 1370
Stassun, K.G., Mathieu, R.D., Luiz, P.R.V., Stroud, N. & Vrba, F.J. 2004, ApJS, 151, 357
Straizys, V., Cernis, K., & Bartasiute, S. 1996, Balt. Astr, 5, 125
Strom, S.E., Vrba, F. & Strom, K.M. 1976, AJ, 81, 314
Surace, J. A. et al. 2004, The SWIRE ELAIS N1 Image Atlases and Source Catalogs,
(Pasadena: Spitzer Science Center), http://ssc.spitzer.caltech.edu/legacy/
Testi, L. & Sargent, A. L. 1998, ApJ, 508, L91
Testi, L., Sargent, A. L., Olmi, L. & Onello, J. S. 1998, ApJ, 540, L53
Trams, N. R. et al. 1999, A&A, 346, 843
van Loon, J. Th., et al. 1999, A&A, 351, 559
Wainscoat, R. J. et al. 1992, ApJS, 83, 111
Weingartner, J. C., & Draine, B. T. 2001, ApJ, 548, 296
Whitney, B. A., Wood, K., Bjorkman, J. E., & Cohen, M. 2003, ApJ, 598, 1079
Young, K. E. 2005, ApJ, 628, 283
Zhang, C. Y. et al. 1988, A&A, 199, 170

– 97 –
Zhang, C. Y., Laureijs, R. J., & Clark, F. O. 1988, A&A, 196, 236
Ziener, R. & Eisloffel, J. 1999, A&A, 347, 565

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

